PAGE:215(a syncopated form of “ordinance” or ordonnance,”
so spelt in this sense since the 17th century), a general term for great guns for military and naval purposes,
as opposed to “small arms” and their equipment; hence the
term also includes miscellaneous stores under the control of the
ordnance department as organized. In England the Master-General
of the Ordnance, from Henry VIII.’s time, was head of
a board, partly military, partly civil, which managed all affairs
concerning the artillery, engineers and «I»matériel«/I» of the army;
this was abolished in 1855, its duties being distributed. The
making of surveys and maps (see «LN:Map|Map«/LN») was, for instance, handed
over eventually (1889) to the Board of Agriculture, though the
term “ordnance survey” still shows the origin.

«CTR»«SC»I. History and Construction«/SC»«/CTR»

The efficiency of any weapon depends entirely on two factors:
(1) its power to destroy men and material, (2) the moral effect
upon the enemy. Even at the present day the moral effect of
gun fire is of great importance, but when guns were first used
the noise they made on discharge must have produced a bewildering
fear in those without previous experience of them;
more especially would this be the case with horses and other
animals. Villani wrote of the battle of Cressy that the “English
guns made a noise like thunder and caused much loss in men
and horses” (Hime, «I»Proc. R. A. Institution«/I», vol. 26). Now,
the moral effect may be considered more or less constant, for,
as men are educated to the presence of artillery, the range of
guns, their accuracy, mobility and on shore their invisibility, so
increase that there is always the ever present fear that the
stroke will fall without giving any evidence of whence it came.
On the other hand, the development of the gun has always
had an upward tendency, which of late years has been very
marked; the demand for the increase of energy has kept pace
with—or rather in recent times may be said to have caused—improvements
in metallurgical science.

The evolution of ordnance may be divided roughly into three
epochs. The first includes that period during which stone shot
were principally employed; the guns during this period (1313
to 1520) were mostly made of wrought iron, although the art of
casting bronze was then well known. This was due to the fact
that guns were made of large size to fire heavy stone shot, and,
in consequence, bronze guns would be very expensive, besides
which wrought iron was the stronger material. The second
epoch was that extending from 1520 to 1854, during which
cast iron round shot were generally employed. In this epoch,
both bronze and cast iron ordnance were used, but the progress
achieved was remarkably small. The increase of power actually
obtained was due to the use of corn, instead of serpentine, powder,
but guns were undoubtedly much better proportioned towards
the middle and end of this period than they were at the beginning.
The third or present epoch may be said to have commenced
in 1854, when elongated projectiles and rifled guns were beginning
to be adopted. The rapid progress made during this
period is as remarkable as the unproductiveness of the second
epoch. Even during recent years the call for greater power
has produced results which were believed to be impossible in
1890.

The actual date of the introduction of cannon, and the country
in which they first appeared, have been the subject of much
antiquarian research; but no definite conclusion has been arrived
at. Some writers suppose (see Brackenbury, “Ancient Cannon
in Europe” in «I»Proc. Royal Artillery Inst«/I»., vol. iv.) that gunpowder
was the result of a gradual development from incendiary
compounds, such as Greek and sea fire of far earlier times, and
that cannon followed in natural sequence. Other writers
attribute the invention of cannon to the Chinese or Arabs. In
any case, after their introduction into Europe a comparatively
rapid progress was made. Early in the 14th century the first
guns were small and vase shaped; towards the end they had
become of huge dimensions firing heavy stone shot of from 200
to 450 lb weight.

The earliest known representation of a gun in England is
contained in an illuminated manuscript “De Officiis Regum”
at Christ Church, Oxford, of the time of Edward II. (1326).
This clearly shows a knight in armour firing a short primitive
weapon shaped something like a vase and loaded with an incendiary
arrow. This type of gun was a muzzle loader with a
vent channel at the breech end. There seems to be undoubted
evidence that in 1338 there existed breech-loading guns of both
iron and brass, provided with one or more movable chambers
to facilitate loading («I»Proc. R. A. I.«/I», vol. iv. p. 291). These firearms
were evidently very small, as only 2 lb of gunpowder
were provided for firing 48 arrows, or about seven-tenths of an ounce for each charge.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig. 1.png|width=360}}

«BR»
«FS[92%]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 1. — Dulle Griete, Ghent.«/FS»«/CTR»

The great Bombarde of Ghent, called “Dulle Griete” (fig. 1) is believed to belong to the end of the century, probably about
1382, and, according to the «I»Guide des voyageurs dans la ville de Gand«/I» (Voisin) the people of Ghent used it in 1411. This gun,PAGE:216which weighs about 13 tons, is formed of an inner lining of
wrought iron longitudinal bars arranged like the staves of a
cask and welded together, surrounded by rings of wrought iron
driven or shrunk on. The chamber portion is of smaller diameter,
and some suppose it to be screwed to the muzzle portion.
The length of the gun is 197 in., the diameter of the bore 25 in.,
and the chamber 10 in. at the front and tapering to 6 in. diameter
at the breech end. It fired a granite ball weighing about
700 lb. Two wrought iron guns left by the English in 1423 when
they had to raise the siege of Mont St Michel in Normandy belong
to about the same period; the larger of these guns has a bore of
19 in. diameter.
“Mons Meg”
(fig. 2) in Edinburgh
Castle is a
wrought iron gun
of a little later
period; it is built up in the same manner of iron bars and
external rings. It has a calibre of 20 in. and fired a granite
shot weighing 330 lb.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 2.png|width=320}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 2.— Mons Meg.«/CTR»

Bronze guns of almost identical dimensions to the “Dulle
Griete” were cast a little later (1468) at Constantinople (see
Lefroy, «I»Proc. R. A. I.«/I», vol. vi.). One of these is now in the
Royal Military Repository, Woolwich. It is in two pieces
screwed together: the front portion has a calibre of 25 in. and
is for the reception of the stone shot, which weighed 672 lb; and
a rear portion, forming the powder chamber, of 10 in. diameter.
The whole gun weighs nearly 18¾ tons.

To give some idea of the power of these guns, the damage
done by them to Sir John Duckworth’s squadron in 1807 when
the Dardanelles were forced may be instanced. In this engagement
six men-of-war were more or less damaged and some 126
men were killed or wounded. The guns were too unwieldy to lay
for each round and were consequently placed in a permanent
position; they were often kept loaded for months.

The 16th century was remarkable from the fact that the large
bombard type was discarded and smaller wrought iron guns
were made. This was due to the use of iron projectiles, which
enabled a blow to be delivered from a comparatively small gun
as destructive as that from the very weighty bombards throwing
stone shot.

Bronze guns also now came into great favour. They were
first cast in England in 1521 (Henry VIII.), and iron cannon
about 1540, foreign founders being introduced for the purpose
of teaching the English the art. The “Mary Rose,” which sank
off Spithead in 1545, had on board both breech-loading wrought-iron
and muzzle-loading bronze guns.

The smaller guns cast at this period were of considerable
length, probably on account of the large charges of meal powder
which were fired. The long bronze gun in Dover Castle known
as “Queen Elizabeth’s pocket pistol” has a calibre of 4·75 in.;
its bore is 23 ft. 1 in. long or 58 calibres, but its total length
including the cascable is 24 ft. 6 in. It was cast at Utrecht in
1544 and presented by Charles V. to Henry VIII.

Little or no classification of the various types of guns was
attempted during the 15th century. The following century saw
some attempt made at uniformity and the division of the several
calibres into classes, but it was not until about 1739, when Maritz
of Geneva introduced the boring of guns from the solid, that
actual uniformity of calibre was attained, as up to this date
they were always cast hollow and discrepancies naturally
occurred. In France organization was attempted in 1732 by
Vallière, but to «LN:Gribeauval, Jean Baptiste de|Gribeauvai«/LN» («I»q.v.«/I») is due the credit of having
simplified artillery and introduced great improvements in the
equipment.

It is not possible to compare properly the power of the earlier
guns; at first small and feeble, they became later large and
unwieldy, but still feeble. The gunpowder called “serpentine”
often compounded from separate ingredients on the spot at the
time of loading, burnt slowly without strength and naturally varied
from round to round. The more fiercely burning granulated
or corned powder, introduced into Germany about 1429, and
into England shortly after, was too strong for the larger pieces
of that date, and could be used only for small firearms for more
than a century after. These small guns were often loaded with
a lead or lead-coated ball driven down the bore by hammering.

The bronze and cast iron ordnance which followed in the 16th
century were strengthened in the 17th century, and so were
more adapted to use the corned powder. By this means some
access of energy and greater effective ranges were obtained.

In the 18th century and in the first half of the 19th no change
of importance was made. Greater purity of the ingredients and
better methods of manufacture had improved gunpowder; the
windage between the shot and the bore had also been reduced,
and guns had been strengthened to meet this progress, but the
principles of construction remained unaltered until the middle
of the 19th century. Metallurgical science had made great
progress, but cast iron was still the only metal considered
suitable for large guns, whilst bronze was used for field guns.
Many accidents, due to defects developing during practice, had,
however, occurred, in order to prevent which experimental guns
constructed of stronger material such as forged iron and steel
had been made. Some of these weapons were merely massive
solid blocks, with a hole bored in for the bore, and only withstood
a few rounds before bursting. This result was attributed
to the metal being of an indifferent quality—quite a possible
reason as the treatment of large masses of steel was then in its
infancy, and even with the best modern appliances difficulties
have always existed in the efficient welding of large forgings of
iron. Forged iron, however, always gave some evidence of its
impending failure whereas the steel burst in pieces suddenly;
steel was, therefore, considered too treacherous a material for
use in ordnance. This view held for many years, and steel was
only again employed after many trials had been made to demonstrate
its reliability. It will be seen later that the ill success of
these experiments was greatly due to a want of knowledge of
the correct principles of gun construction.

The progress made since 1854 is dependent on and embraces
improvements in gun construction, rifling and breech mechanisms.

Considerable obscurity exists as regards the means adopted
for mounting the first cannon. From illuminations in contemporary
manuscripts it appears that the earliest
guns, which were trunnionless, were simply laid on
the ground and supported by a timber framing at meats.
each side, whilst the flat breech end rested against a «SH»Old Equipments.«/SH» strong wood support let into the ground to prevent recoil. This
arrangement was no doubt inconvenient, and a little later small
cannon were fastened in a wooden stock by iron bands; larger
guns were supported in massive timber cradles (fig. 3) and
secured thereto by iron straps or ropes. The ponderous weight
to be moved and the deficiency of mechanical means prevented
these large cannon and their cradles from being readily moved
when once placed in position. Laying was of the most primitive
kind, and the bombard was packed up in its wood cradle to the
required elevation once for all. When it was desired to breach
a wall the bombard with its bed would be laid on the ground at
about 100 yds. distance, the breech end of the gun or the rear
end of the bed abutting against a solid baulk of wood fixed to
the ground. “Mons Meg” was originally provided with a wood
cradle.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 3.png|width=400}}</td></tr><tr><td>«FS[92%]»Redrawn from Mallet’s «I»Construction of Artillery«/I».«/FS»</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:center">«SC»Fig«/SC». 3. — Primitive Gun-mounting.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
It is by no means certain when wheeled carriages werePAGE:217introduced. They must have gradually appeared as a means of
surmounting the difficulties engendered by the recoil of the piece
and of transport of the early guns and their cradles. Andrea
Redusio mentions in «I»Chronicon Tarvisinum«/I» the use of two
wheeled bombard carriages at the siege of Quero by the Venetians
in 1376. It does not follow that these weapons were of large
dimensions, as the term “bombard” was applied to small guns
as well as to the more ponderous types.

The ancient carriages used on land are remarkable from the
fact that in general design they contain the main principles
which have been included in field carriages up to the present day.
Until 1870 the body of all field carriages was made of wood.
In an early type the trail portion was made of a solid baulk
of timber supported at the front by a hard wood axletree, on
the arms of which the wheels were placed (iron axletrees were
introduced by Gribeauval in 1765). The gun resting in its
wooden cradle was carried in bearings on the trail immediately
over the axletree (fig. 4), the cradle being provided with an
axle or trunnions for the purpose. For giving elevation a wood
arc was fixed to the trail towards the rear end, and the breech
end could be moved up and down along this arc and fixed at
certain positions by a pin passing through both cradle and arc.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;font-size:92%;line-height:100%"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 4.png|width=400}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SPAN[style:position:relative; bottom:2em; font-size:85%]»From Clephan, «I»Early Ordnance«/I».«/SPAN»</td></tr><tr><td>«SPAN[style:position:relative; bottom:1.2em]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 4.—Early Field Gun.«/SPAN»</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
About the middle of the 15th century the trunnions were
formed with the gun—the wood cradle therefore became unnecessary
and was discarded. The carriage was then formed of
two strong cheeks or sides of wood fastened together by four
wood transoms. At the front end the cheeks were secured to
the wooden axletree, which was strengthened by a bar of iron
let into its under side. Trunnion bearings were cut in the upper
surface of the cheeks over the axletree, and these were lined
with iron, while the trunnions were secured in position by iron
cap-squares. Elevation was given by a wedge or “quoin”
being placed under the breech and supported by a transom or
stool bed. For transport the trail end of the carriage was supported
on a limber, a pintle on the limber body passing through
a hole in the trail. One set of shafts were fixed to the limber,
and a single horse was harnessed to them; the remainder of the
team were attached in pairs in front. A driver was provided for
every two pairs of horses. In Italy oxen were often yoked to
the larger guns instead of horses. Tartaglia mentions in his
«I»Nova scientia«/I» (1562) that 28 oxen were required for a gun 15 ft.
in length and weighing 13,000 lb; horses were used for small
guns only.

For service on board ship the difficulties of the cramped
situation seem to have been surmounted in an ingenious manner.
In the “Mary Rose,” sunk in the reign of Henry VIII., the
brass guns with trunnions were mounted on short wood carriages
provided with four small wood wheels called “trucks” and
fastened to the gun ports by rope breechings. The iron breech-loading
guns were employed in restricted positions where loading
at the muzzle would be difficult. They had no trunnions and
were mounted in a wood cradle, the under side of which was
grooved to enable it to slide on a directing bar.

At the end of the 17th century not much progress had been
made. The larger guns were mounted on short wood carriages
having two or four “trucks.” The guns and carriages recoiled
along the vessel’s deck, and where this endangered the masts
or other structures the recoil was hindered by soft substances
being laid down in the path of the recoil.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:300px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 5.png|width=300}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 5.—Truck Carriage.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

The small guns were mounted in iron Y pieces—the upper
arms being provided with bearings for the gun trunnions—and
the stalk formed a
pivot which rested
in a socket in the
vessel’s side or
on a wall, so that
the gun could be
turned to any
quarter.

Similar carriages
(fig. 5) existed
until the advent
of rifled guns, but a few small improvements, such as screw
elevating gear in place of the quoin, had been approved.
Cast iron standing carriages were also, about 1825, used on land
for hot climates and situations not much exposed.

The earliest guns were not provided with sights or other
means for directing them. This was not important, as the range
seldom exceeded 100 yds. As, however, ranges
became longer, some means became necessary for
giving the correct line and elevation (see also «LN:Sights|Sights«/LN»). The
direction for line was easily obtained by looking over the gun and «SH»Sighting.«/SH» moving the carriage trail to the right or left as was necessary.
For elevation an instrument invented by Tartaglia called a
Gunner’s Quadrant (sometimes also called a Gunner’s Square)
was used; this was a graduated quadrant of a circle (fig. 6)
connecting a long and
short arm forming a
right angle; a line with
a plummet hung from
the angle in such a«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:250px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 6.png|width=250}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 6.—Gunner’s Quadrant.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
manner that on the long
arm being placed along
the bore near the muzzle
the plummet hung down
against the quadrant
and indicated the degrees
of elevation given to the piece. The quadrant was divided
into 90° and also into 12 parts; it was continued past the
short arm for some degrees to enable depression to be given
to the gun. The instrument was also used for surveying in
obtaining the heights of buildings, and is still much employed
for elevating guns in its clinometer form, in which a level takes
the place of the plummet.

For short range firing a dispart sight was in use early in the 17th century. A notch was cut on the top of the breech or base ring, and on the muzzle ring a notched fore sight (called the dispart sight) was placed in the same vertical plane as the notch, and of such a height that a line stretched from the top of the breech ring notch to the notch of the foresight was parallel to the axis of the bore. These sights were well enough for close, horizontal fire and so long as the enemy were within what was called “point blank” range; that is the range to the first graze, on a horizontal plane, of the shot when fired from a gun the axis of which is horizontal. As this range depends entirely, other things being equal, on the height of the gun’s axis above the horizontal plane, it is not very definite. When, however, the enemy were at a greater distance, elevation had to be given to the gun and, as a quadrant was slow and not easy to use, there was introduced an instrument, called a Gunner’s Rule (see «I»The Art of Gunnery«/I», by Nathanael Nye, 1670), which was really a primitive form of tangent sight. This was a flat brassPAGE:218scale 12 or 14 in. long divided on its flat surface into divisions
proportional to the tangents of angles with a base equal to the
distance from the notch on the base ring to the dispart notch. A
slit was made along the rule, and a thread with a bead on it was
mounted on a slider so that it could be moved in the slit to any
required graduation. By sighting along the bead to the dispart
the gun could be laid on any object. Later still, the requisite
elevation was obtained by cutting a series of notches on the side
of the base ring and one on the muzzle ring. These were called
“Quarter Sights” and allowed of elevations up to 3°; the lowest
notch with the one on the muzzle swell gave a line parallel to the
axis of the bore but above it so as to clear the cap-squares of the
trunnions. This system was also used in bronze field guns and
in all cast iron guns up to the 32-pdr. Difficulties in laying
occurred unless the direction was obtained by looking over the
top or dispart sight and the elevation then given by the quarter
sights. This was the system of sighting in use during the great
naval actions of the end of the 18th century and the beginning
of the 19th century. A pointed dispart sight was often used,
and for naval purposes it was fixed on the reinforce near the
trunnions, as the recoil of the gun through the port would
destroy it if fixed on the muzzle swell.

The double sighting operation was rendered unnecessary by the
use of “tangent scales” introduced by Gribeauval. Similar scales
were soon adopted in the English land service artillery, but they
were not fully adopted in the English navy until about 1854
(see «I»Naval Gunnery«/I», by Sir Howard Douglas, p. 390), although
in the United States navy a system of sighting, which enabled
the guns to be layed at any degree of elevation, had been
applied as early as 1812. These tangent scales were of brass
fitting into sockets on the breech end of the gun; they were
used in conjunction with the dispart fore sight and gave elevation
up to 4° or 5° over the top of the gun. For greater elevation
a wooden tangent scale was provided which gave elevation up
to 8° or 10°.

In the British navy, before tangent sights were used, the plan
often adopted for rapidly laying the guns was by sighting, with
the notch on the breech ring and the dispart sight, on some
part of the masts of the enemy’s vessel at a height corresponding
to the range.

With sailing ships about the middle of the 19th century the
angle of heel of the vessel when it was sailing on a wind was
ascertained from the ship’s pendulum, and the lee guns elevated
or the weather guns depressed to compensate by means of a
graduated wooden stave called a “heel scale” of which one end
was placed on the deck or last step of the carriage whilst the
upper end read in connection with a scale of degrees engraved
on the flat end of the cascable.

Subsequently the term “tangent sight” was given to the
“tangent scales,” and they were fitted into holes made in the
body of the gun—the foresight usually being fitted to a hole
in the gun near the trunnions. Two pairs of sights—one at
each side—were generally arranged for, and in rifled guns the
holes for the tangent sight bars were inclined to compensate
for the drift of the projectile. As the drift angle varies with
the muzzle velocity, the tangent sights of howitzers were set
vertically, so that for the various charges used the deflection
to compensate for drift had to be given on the head of the sight
bar. Modern forms of sights are described and illustrated in the
article «LN:Sights|Sights«/LN».

Breech-loading ordnance dates from about the end of the
14th century, or soon after the introduction of cannon into
England (Brackenbury, «I»Proc. R.A.I.«/I» v. 32). The
body, in some cases, was fixed to a wood
cradle by iron straps and the breech portion kept in
position between the muzzle portion and a vertical «SH»Breech-loading Ordnance.«/SH» block of wood fixed to the end of the cradle, by a wedge. Accidents
must have been common, and improvements were made
by dropping the breech or chamber of the weapon into a receptacle,
solidly forged on or fastened by lugs to the rear end
of the gun (fig. 7). This system was used for small guns only,
such as wall pieces, &c., which could not be easily loaded at the
muzzle owing to the position in which they were placed, and in
order to obtain rapidity each gun was furnished with several
chambers.
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 7.png|align=center|width=390}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 7.—Early Breech-loader.«/CTR»

Guns of this nature, called Petrieroes a Braza, were used in
particular positions even at the end of the 17th century. Moretii
states that they carried a stone ball of from 2 lb to 14 lb, which
was placed in the bore of the gun and kept in position by wads.
The chambers, resembling an ordinary tankard in shape, had a
spigot formed on their front end which entered into a corresponding
recess at the rear end of the bore and so formed a rude
joint. Each chamber was nearly filled with powder and the
mouth closed by a wood stopper driven in; it was then inserted
into the breech of the gun and secured by a wedge. Even with
feeble gunpowder this means of securing the chamber does not
commend itself, but as powder improved there was a greater
probability of the breech end of the gun giving way; besides
which the escape of the powder gas from the imperfect joint
between the chamber and gun must have caused great inconvenience.
To these causes must be attributed the general
disuse of the breech-loading system during the 18th and first
half of the 19th centuries.

Robins mentions («I»Tracts of Gunnery«/I», p. 337) that experimental
breech-loading rifled pieces had been tried in 1745 in
England to surmount the difficulty of loading from the muzzle.
In these there was an opening made in the side of the breech
which, after the loading had been completed, was closed by a
screw. The breech arrangement (fig. 8) of the rifled gun invented 
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 8.png|align=center|width=400}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 8.—Cavalli Gun, 1845.«/CTR»

by Major Cavalli, a Sardinian officer, in 1845, was far
superior to anything tried previously. After the projectile and
charge had been loaded into the gun through the breech, a cast
iron cylindrical plug, cupped on the front face, was introduced
into the chamber; a copper ring was placed against its rear
face; finally a strong iron wedge was passed through the body
of the gun horizontally just in rear of the plug, and prevented
it being blown out of the gun. In England the breech of one
of the experimental guns was blown off after only a few rounds
had been fired. In Wahrendorff’s gun, invented in 1846, the
breech arrangement (fig. 9) was very similar in principle to the
Cavalli gun. In addition to the breech plug and horizontal
wedge there was an iron door, hinged to the breech face of the
gun, which carried a rod attached to the rear of the breech plug.
The horizontal wedge had a slot cut from its right side to the
centre, so that it might freely pass this rod. After loading,PAGE:219the hinged door, with the breech plug resting against its front
face, was swung into the breech opening, and the plug was
pushed forward to its position in the chamber of the gun; the
wedge was then pushed across to prevent the plug being blown
back, and, finally, a nut screwed to the rear end of the plug
rod was given a couple of turns so that all was made tight and
secure. After firing, the breech was opened by reversing these
operations.

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 9.png|align=center|width=390}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 9.—Wahrendorff Gun, 1846.«/CTR»

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 10.png|align=center|width=350}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 10.—Armstrong B.L. Arrangement.«/CTR»

The Armstrong system of breech-loading introduced in 1854
was the first to give satisfactory results; its simple design and
few parts produced a favourable effect in the minds of artillerists,
which was increased by the excellent accuracy obtained in
shooting. The gun (fig. 10) had a removable breech block having
on its front face a coned copper ring which fitted into a coned
seating at the breech end of the powder chamber. The breech
block was secured by means of a powerful breech screw; a hole
was made through the screw so that, in loading, the shell and
cartridge could be passed through it after the breech block had
been removed. After loading, the block was dropped into its
place and the breech screw turned rapidly so that it might jam
the block against its seating, and so prevent the escape of powder
gas when the gun was fired. This gun was most successful, and
a great number of guns of this type were soon introduced into
the British army and navy.

They were employed in the China campaign of 1860, and
satisfactory reports were made as to their serviceableness; but
while the breech-loading system had obtained a firm footing on the
Continent of Europe, there was a strong prejudice against it in
England, and about 1864 M.L.R. guns were adopted. Breechloaders
did not again find favour until about 1882, when a demand
was made for more powerful guns than the M.L.R. In consequence,
M.L. guns having enlarged chambers for burning large
charges of prismatic powder were experimented with by the
Elswick Ordnance Co. and subsequently by the War Office,
The results were so promising that means were sought for further
improvements, and breech-loading guns, having the Elswick
cup obturation, were reintroduced.

Up to about 1850 the dimensions of canon had been proportioned
by means of empirical rules, as the real principles underlying
the construction of ordnance had been little
understood. It was known of course that a gun was
subjected to two fundamental stresses—a circumferential
tension tending to split the gun open longitudinally, and «SH»Built-up guns.«/SH» a longitudinal tension tending to pull the gun apart lengthwise;
the longitudinal strength of a gun is usually greatly in excess
of any requirements. It is easy to demonstrate that any so-called
homogeneous gun, «I»i.e.«/I» a gun made of solid material and not
built up, soon reaches a limit of thickness beyond which
additional thickness is practically useless in giving strength
to resist circumferential stress. This is due to the fact that the
stress on the metal near the bore is far higher than that' on
the outer portion and soon reaches its maximum resistance which
additional thickness of metal does not materially increase. The
gun can, however, be arranged to withstand a considerably
higher working pressure by building it up on the principle of
initial tensions. The inner layers of the metal are thereby
compressed so that the gas pressure has first to reverse this
compression and then to extend the metal. The gun barrel
supported by the contraction of the outer hoops will then be able
to endure a gas pressure which can be expressed as being proportional
to the initial «I»compression«/I» plus the «I»extension«/I», whereas in the
old type solid gun it was proportional to the extension only.

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 11.png|align=center|width=400}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 11.—Armstrong B.L. Construction.«/CTR»

The first to employ successfully this important principle for all parts
of a gun was «LN:Armstrong, William George Armstrong, Baron|Lord Armstrong«/LN» («I»q.v.«/I»), who in 1855–1856 produced
a breech-loading field gun with a steel barrel strengthened by
wrought iron hoops. In this system (fig. 11) wrought iron coils
were shrunk over one another so that the inner tube, or barrel,
was placed in a state of compression and the outer portions in
a state of tension—the parts so proportioned that each performs
its maximum duty in resisting the pressure from within. Further,
by forming the outer parts of wrought iron bar coiled round a
mandril and then welding the coil into a solid hoop, the fibre
of the iron was arranged circumferentially and was thus in
the best position to resist this stress. These outer coils were
shrunk over a hollow breech-piece of forged iron, having the fibre
running lengthwise to resist the longitudinal stress. The several
cylinders were shrunk over the steel inner tube or barrel. To
obtain the necessary compression the exterior diameter of the
inner portion is turned in a lathe slightly greater than the interior
diameter of the outer coil. The outer coil is heated and expands;
it is then slipped over the inner portion and contracts on cooling.
If the strength of the two parts has been properly adjusted the
outer will remain in a state of tension and the inner in a state
of compression.

Every nation has adopted this fundamental principle which
governs all systems of modern gun construction. The winding,
at a high tension, of thin wire or ribbon on the barrel or on one of
the outer coils may be considered as having an exactly similar
effect to the shrinking of thin hoops over one another. The
American, Dr Woodbridge, claims to have originated the system
of strengthening guns by wire in 1850; Brunel, the great railway
engineer, also had similar plans; to Longridge, however, belongs
the credit of pointing out the proper mode of winding on the
wire with initial tension so adjusted as to make the firing tension
(«I»i.e.«/I» the tension which exists when the gun is fired) of the
wire uniform for the maximum proof powder pressure. GreatPAGE:220success attended the early introduction of the coil system.
Large numbers (about 3500) of breech-loading Armstrong guns
from 2·5 in. to 7 in. calibre were manufactured for England
alone; most of these had barrels of coiled iron, but solid forged
iron barrels were also employed and a few
were of steel. This manufacture continued
until 1867, when M.L. guns built up on the coil
system (fig. 12) with the French form of rifling
were adopted; but as the knowledge of the
proper treatment and the quality of the steel
had improved, steel barrels bored from a solid
steel forging were mostly used; the exterior
layers were still iron hoops with the fibre of the
metal disposed as in the original type. In
order to cheapen manufacture the coils were
thickened, by Mr Fraser of Woolwich Arsenal,
so that a few thick coils were used instead of
a number of thin ones (fig. 13).

In the Fraser system an attempt was made to
obtain rigidity of construction and additional
longitudinal strength by interlocking the various
coils from breech to muzzle; this feature still
exists in all designs adopted by the English
government, but foreign designers do not favour it altogether, and
many of their guns of the latest type have a number of short
independent hoops shrunk on, especially over the chase. Their view
is that movements—such as stretching of the inner parts—are
bound to take place under the huge forces acting upon the tubes,
and that it is better to allow freedom for these to take place
naturally rather than to make any attempt to retard them.On
the other hand it cannot be denied that the rigid construction is
conducive to strength and durability, but it is essential that massive
tubes of the highest quality of steel should be employed.
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 12.png|align=center|width=400}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 12.—M.L. Gun Construction.«/CTR»

The actual building up of a gun entails operations which are
exactly similar, whether it be of the M.L. or B.L. system; and
the hardening treatment of the steel is also the same—the coiled
iron hoops when welded, of course, received no such treatment.
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 13.png|align=center|width=400}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 13.—M.L. Gun Construction (Fraser).«/CTR»

Fig. 14 shows the various stages of building up a B.L. gun and
illustrates at the same time the principle of the interlocking
system.

The steel barrels of the M.L. guns were forged solid; the material
was then tested so as to determine the most suitable temperature at
which the oil hardening treatment should be carried out after the
barrel had been bored. The bored barrel was simply heated to the
required temperature and plunged vertically into a tank of oil.
The subsequent annealing process was not introduced until some
years after; it is therefore not to be wondered at that steel proved
untrustworthy and so was used with reluctance.

Since 1880 the steel industry has made so much progress that this
material is now regarded as the metal most to be relied on. The long
high-power guns, however, require to be worked at a greater chamber
pressure than the older B.L. guns, with which 15 tons or 16 tons per
square inch was considered the maximum. With the designs now
produced 18·5 tons to 20 tons per square inch working pressure in the
chamber is the general rule.

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 14.png|align=center|width=500}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 14.—Modern B.L. Construction.«/CTR»

A stronger material than ordinary carbon gun steel was consequently
demanded from the steel-makers, in order to keep the weights
of the heavier natures of guns within reasonable limits. The demand
was met by the introduction of a gun steel having about 4% of
nickel in addition to about 0·4% of carbon. This alloy gives great
toughness and endurance under a suitable oil hardening and annealing
process, the yielding stress being about 26 tons to 28 tons and the
breaking stress from 45 tons to 55 tons per square inch, with an
elongation of 16%. The tests for ordinary carbon gun steel are:
“yield not less than 21 tons, breaking stress between 34 tons and
44 tons per square inch, and elongation 17%.”

The toughness of nickel steel forgings renders them much more
difficult to machine, but the advantages have been so great that
practically all barrels and hoops (except jackets) of modern guns
are now made of this material.

The gun steel, whether of the carbon or nickel quality, used in
England and most foreign countries, is prepared by the open hearth
method in a regenerative gas furnace of the Siemens-Martin
type (see «LN:Iron and Steel|Iron and Steel«/LN»). The steel is run from
the furnace into a large ladle, previously heated by gas,
and from this it is allowed to run into a cast iron ingot mould of «SH»Gun forgings.«/SH» from 10 to 12 ft. high and 2 ft. or more in diameter. With very
large ingots two furnaces may have to be employed. The external
shape of these ingots varies in different steel works, but they are so
arranged that, as the ingot slowly cools, the contraction of the metal
shall not set up dangerous internal stresses. The top of the ingot
is generally porous, and consequently, after cooling, it is usual
for about one-third of the length of the ingot to be cut from the top
and remelted; a small part of the bottom is also often discarded.
The centre of the larger ingots is also inclined to be unsound, and
a hole is therefore bored through them to remove this part. In the
Whitworth and Harmet methods of fluid compressed steel, this
porosity at the top and centre of the ingot does not occur to
the same extent, and a much greater portion can therefore be
utilized.

The sound portion of the ingot is now heated in a reheating gas
furnace, which is usually built in close proximity to a hydraulic
forging press (fig. 15, Plate I.). This press is now almost exclusively
used for forging the steel in place of the steam hammers which were
formerly an important feature in all large works. The largest of
these steam hammers could not deliver a blow of much more than
some 500 ft. tons of energy; with the hydraulic press, however,
the pressure amounts to, for ordinary purposes, from 1000 tons to
5000 tons, while for the manufacture of armour plates it may amount
to as much as 10,000 or 12,000 tons.

For forgings of 8-in. internal diameter and upwards, the bored out
ingot, just mentioned, is forged hollow on a tubular mandril, kept
cool by water running through the centre; from two to four hours
forging work can be performed before the metal has cooled down
too much. Generally one end of the ingot is forged down to the
proper size; it is then reheated and the other end similarly treated.

The forging of the steel and the subsequent operations have a very
marked influence on the structure of the metal, as will be seen from
the micro-photographs shown in the article «LN:Alloys|Alloys«/LN», where («I»a«/I») and
(«I»b«/I») show the structure of the cast steel of the actual ingot; from
this it will be noticed that the crystals are very large and prominent,
but, as the metal passes through the various operations, these
crystals become smaller and less pronounced. Thus («I»c«/I») and («I»d«/I»)
show the metal after forging; («I»e«/I») shows the pearlite structure with
a magnification of 1000 diameters, which disappears on the steel
being oil hardened, and («I»f«/I») shows the oil hardened and annealed
crystals. At the Bofors Works in Sweden, gun barrels up to 24 cm.
(9·5 in.) calibre have been formed of an unforged cast steel tube;
but this practice, although allowing of the production of an inexpensive
gun, is not followed by other nations.

After the forging is completed, it is annealed by reheating and
cooling slowly, and test pieces are cut from each end tangentiallyPAGE:223to the circumference of the bore; these are tested to ascertain the
quality of the steel in the soft state.

It is found that the quality of the steel is greatly improved by
forging, so long as this is not carried so far as to set up a laminar
structure in the metal, which is thereby rendered less suitable for
gun construction—being weaker across the laminae than in the
other directions. It is then termed over-forged.

If the tests are satisfactory the forging is rough-turned and bored,
then reheated to a temperature of about 1600° F., and hardened by
plunging it into a vertical tank of rape oil. This process is a somewhat
critical one and great care is observed in uniformly heating,
to the required temperature, the whole of the forging in a furnace
in close proximity to the oil tank into which it is plunged and
completely submerged as rapidly as possible. In some cases the
oil in the tank is circulated by pumping, so that uniformity of cooling
is ensured; and, in addition, the oil tank is surrounded by a water
jacket which also helps to keep it at a uniform heat. The forging is
subsequently again heated to about 1200° F. and allowed to cool
slowly by being placed in warm sand, &c. This last operation is
termed annealing, and is intended to dissipate any internal stress
which may have been induced in the forging by any of the previous
processes, especially that of oil-hardening. After this annealing
process a second set of test pieces, two for tensile and two for bending
test, are cut from each end of the forging in the positions above
mentioned; for guns of less than 3-in. calibre only half this number
of test pieces is taken; and with hoops of less than 48 in. in length
the test pieces are taken only from the end which formed the upper
part of the cast ingot.

In all cases of annealed steel the test pieces of 2 in. length and
0·533 in. diameter must give the stipulated tests according to the
character of the steel. For breech screws the steel is made of a
harder quality, as it has to resist a crushing stress. These are the
tests required in England, but they differ in different countries; for
instance in France a harder class of carbon steel is employed for
hoops, in which the tensile strength must not be less than 44·5 tons,
nor the elastic limit less than 28·5 tons per square inch, neither must
the elongation fall below 12%.
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 16.png|align=center|width=800}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC».16.—Lathe used in Gun Construction.«/CTR»

Assuming that the tests of the annealed forging are satisfactory,
the forging, which we will suppose to be a barrel, is tested for straightness
and if necessary rectified. It is then rough-turned in a lathe
(fig. 16) “to break the skin” (as it is termed technically) and so
prevent warping during the subsequent operations. It is then
bored out to nearly the finished dimension and afterwards fine
turned on the exterior. In the meantime the other portions of the
gun are in progress, and as it is far easier to turn down the outside
of a tube than to bore out the interior of the superimposed one to
the exact measurements required to allow for shrinkage, the interior
of the jacket and other hoops are bored out and finished before the
exterior of the internal tubes or of the barrel is fine turned. The
process of boring is illustrated in fig. 17. The barrel or hoop A, to
be bored, is passed through the revolving headstock B and firmly
held by jaws C, the other end being supported on rollers D. A
head E, mounted on the end of a boring bar F, is drawn gradually
through the barrel, as it revolves, by the leading screw K actuated
by the gear G. The boring head is provided with two or more
cutting tools, and also with a number of brass pins or pieces of
hard wood to act as guides, in order to keep the boring head central
after it has entered the barrel. The revolving headstock B is
driven by a belt and suitable gearing.

With wire guns the procedure is somewhat different. The wire
is wound on to its tube, which has been previously fine turned; the
exterior diameter of the wire is then carefully measured and the
interior of the covering tube or hoop finished to suit. The covering
hoop is allowed usually only a small shrinkage, or sometimes none,
as it is simply intended as a protection to the wire and to give
longitudinal strength; but in order to place it over the wire it must
be heated and thus some little contraction always does take place
on cooling. The heat to which these hoops are brought for shrinking
never exceeds that used in annealing, otherwise the modifying
effects of this process would be interfered with.

In the earliest modern type B.L. guns, the breech screw engaged
directly with a screw thread cut in the barrel, which thus had to
resist a large portion, if not all, of the longitudinal stress. This was
also the system first adopted in France, but there are certain
objections to it, the principal being that the barrel must be made of
large diameter to meet the longitudinal stress, and this in consequence
reduces the circumferential strength of the gun. Again, the diameter
of the screw is always considerably larger than the breech opening,
and so an abrupt change of section takes place, which it is always
best to avoid in structures liable to sudden shocks. The thick
barrel, however, gives stiffness against bending and, moreover, does
not materially lengthen with firing; thin barrels on the other hand
are gradually extended by the drawing out action of the shot as it
is forced through the gun. In some large guns with excessively thin
barrels this action was so pronounced as to entail considerable
inconvenience. In the English system the breech screw is engaged
either in the breech piece, «I»i.e.«/I» the hoop which is shrunk on over
the breech end of the barrel, or in a special bush screwed into the
breech piece. This latter method suits the latest system of construction
in which the breech piece is put on the barrel from the
muzzle, while with the earlier type it was put on from the breech end.

With the earlier modern guns short hoops were used whenever
possible, as, for instance, over the chase, principally because the
steel in short lengths was less likely to contain flaws, but as the
metallurgical processes of steel making developed the necessity for
this disappeared, and the hoops became gradually longer. This has
however, increased correspondingly the difficulties in boring and
turning, and, to a much greater extent, those encountered in building
up the gun. In this operation the greatest care has to be taken, or
warping will occur during heating. The tubes are heated in a vertical
cylindrical furnace, gas jets playing both on the exterior and interior
of the tube. When sufficiently hot, known by the diameter of the
tube expanding to equal previously prepared gauges, the tube is
raised out of the furnace and dropped vertically over the barrel or
other portion of the gun (fig. 18, Plate II.). In cooling it shrinks
longitudinally as well as circumferentially, and in order to avoid
gaps between adjoining tubes the tube is, after being placed in
position, cooled at one end by a ring of water jets to make it grip,
while the other portions are kept hot by rings of burning gas
flames, which are successively extinguished to allow the hoop to
shorten gradually and thus prevent internal longitudinal stress. A
stream of water is also directed along the interior of the gun
during the building up process, in order to ensure the hoop cooling
from the interior. After the building up has been completed, the
barrel is fine-bored, then chambered and rifled. The breech is then
screwed either for the bush or breech screw and the breech
mechanism fitted to the gun.

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 17.png|align=center|width=800}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 17.—Boring.«/CTR»

In order to obtain additional longitudinal strength the outer
tubes are so arranged that each hooks on to its neighbour from
muzzle to breech. Thus, the chase hoop hooks on to the barrel by
a step, and the succeeding hoops hook on to each other until the
jacket is reached which is then secured to the breech piece by a
strong screwed ring. In all the latest patterns of English guns
there is a single chase hoop covering the forward portion of thePAGE:224gun and a jacket covering the breech portion, an arrangement which simplifies the design but increases the difficulties of manufacture.

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 19.png|align=center|width=400}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 19.—Wire Fastening.«/CTR»
Wire guns are now made of almost all calibres, ranging from 3 in. to 12 in. Many authorities objected to guns of less calibre than
4·7 in. being wound with wire, as they considered that on diameters so small the interior surface of each layer of wire is over-compressed, while the exterior is too much extended; but by proportioning the
thickness of the wire to the diameter of the tube on which it is wound there is no reason for this to be so.

The wire is wound on the barrel at a certain tension, ascertained by calculation, and varying from about 50 tons per square inch for the layers first wound on the gun, to about 35 or 40 for the outer layers. To fasten the wire at the beginning and end several methods
are adopted. In the Woolwich system a narrow annular ring (fig. 19), with slots cut into one of its faces, is shrunk on to the gun; into these slots one end of the wire is inserted and secured in position by a steel screwed plug. The wire is wound on for the distance desired and then back again to the ring, where the end is
fastened off in the same way. At Elswick the wire is fastened by bending it into a shunt cut groove in a similar annular ring, but the wire is only fastened off in the same way after several layers have been wound.

With each succeeding layer of wire the interior layers are compressed, and these in turn compress the barrel. It is therefore necessary, in order to prevent the fatigue of the material, to make
the barrel comparatively thick, or, better still, to have an outer barrel superimposed on the inner one. This latter arrangement is now used in all guns of 4 in. calibre and upwards. It is not so
important with smaller guns as the barrel is always relatively thick, and therefore meets the conditions.

With many modern guns the interior of the outer barrel, termed the “A” tube, is taper bored, the larger end being towards the breech; and the exterior of the inner barrel or liner, called the “inner A tube,” is made tapered to correspond. The latter is, after careful fitting, inserted in the outer barrel while both are cold, and forced into position by hydraulic pressure or other mechanical means.

The details of the machines for winding on the wire (see fig. 20)
differ somewhat in different works, but all are arranged so that
any desired tension can be given to the wire as it is being wound on to
the gun. The wire is manufactured in much the same way as ordinary wire. A red-hot bar of steel, gradually rolled down between rollers to a section about double that which it is finally intended to
have, is annealed and carefully pickled in an acid bath to detach any scale. It is then wound on a drum, ready for the next process, which consists in drawing it through graduated holes made in a
hardened steel draw-plate, the wire being often annealed and pickled during this process. The drawplate holes vary in size from slightly smaller than the rolled bar section to the finished size of the
wire, and, as a rule, the sharp corners of the wire are only given by the last draw. It is found that considerable wear takes place in the holes of the draw-plate, and a new plate may be required for each hank of 500 or 600 yds. of wire. Great importance is attached to the absence of scale from the wire when it is being drawn, and, after pickling, the rolled bar and wire are treated with lime or some
similar substance to facilitate the drawing. The tests for the finished wire are as follows: it has to stand a tensile stress of from 90 to 110 tons per square inch of section, and a test for ductility in which a short length of wire is twisted a considerable number of turns in one direction, then unwound and re-twisted in the opposite direction, without showing signs of fracture. It will be seen that
the wire is extremely strong and the moderate stress of from 35 to 50 tons per square inch, which at most it is called upon to withstand in a gun, is far less than what it could endure with perfect
safety.
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 20.png|align=center|width=800}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 20.—Wire-winding Machine.«/CTR»
The wire after being manufactured is made up into hanks for storage purposes; but when required for gun construction it is thoroughly cleaned and wound on a drum R about 3 ft. 6 in. in diameter, which is placed in one portion of the machine in connexion, with a powerful band friction brake M. The wire is then led to the gun A placed between centres or on rollers B.B. parallel to the axis of the wire drum. By rotating the gun the wire is drawn off from the drum against the resistance of the band brake, which is so designed that, by adjusting the weight S suspended from the brake strap, any desired resistance can be given in order to produce the necessary tension in the wire as it is being wound on the gun. The stress onPAGE:225the wire is indicated on a dial, and the headstock, containing the drum of wire, is capable of being moved along the bed G by a leading screw H, driven by a belt through variable speed cones I; the belt is moved along the cones by forks J, traversed by screws K, which in their turn are actuated by chain belts from the hand wheel L. The traversing speed is regulated to suit the speed of winding by moving the belt along the speed cones.

The wire is rectangular in section, 0·25 in. wide and 0·06 in. thick, and after it has been wound on to the gun it presents a very even surface which requires little further preparation. The diameter over the wire is gauged and the jacket or other covering hoop is carefully bored equal to this, if no shrinkage is to be allowed; or the dimension is diminished in accordance with the amount of shrinkage to be arranged for.

The gun is built up, after wiring, in the same manner as a gun without wire, the jacket or other hoop being heated in the vertical gas furnace and when hot enough dropped into place over the wire, cooled by the ring of water jets at the end first required to grip and kept hot at the other, exactly as before described.

The machine arranged for rifling modern guns is very similar to that employed for the old muzzle-loaders; it is a special tool used in construction only (fig. 21), and is in reality a copying machine. A steel or cast-iron bar J which forms the copy of the developed rifling curve is first
made. The copying bar—which is straight if the rifling is to be uniform «SH»Rifling operation.«/SH» but curved if it is to be increasing—is fixed, inclined at the proper angle, to standards K on the machine. The cutting tool is carried at one end C of a strong hollow cylindrical rifling bar B, the other end of which is fixed to a saddle M. This is moved along the bed of the machine by a long screw N, and the rifling bar is consequently either pushed into the gun or withdrawn by the motion of the saddle along the machine. During this motion it is made to rotate slowly by being connected to the copying bar by suitable gearing I. It will thus be seen that the cutting tool will cut a spiral groove along the bore of the gun in strict conformity with the copy. In most English machines the cutting tool cuts only as the rifling bar is drawn out of the gun; during the reverse motion the cutter F is withdrawn out of action by means of a wedge arrangement actuated by a rod passing through the centre of the rifling bar, which also pushes forward the cutter at the proper time for cutting. One, two or more grooves may be cut at one time, the full depth being attained by slowly feeding the tool after each stroke. After each set of grooves is cut the rifling bar or the gun is rotated so as to bring the cutters to a new position. In some foreign machines the cut is taken as the rifling bar is pushed into the gun.
{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 21.png|align=center|width=800}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 21.—Rifling Machine.«/CTR»

Rifling is the term given to the numerous shallow grooves cut spirally along the bore of a gun; the rib between two grooves is called the “land.” Rifling has been known for many years; it was supposed to increase the range, and no doubt did so, owing to the fact that the bullet having
to be forced into the gun during the loading operation became «SH»Rifling.«/SH» a mechanical fit and prevented to a great extent the loss of gas by windage which occurred with ordinary weapons. Kotter (1520) and Danner (1552), both of Nuremberg, are respectively credited as being the first to rifle gun barrels; and there is at the Rotunda, Woolwich, a muzzle-loading barrel dated 1547 rifled with six fine grooves. At this early period, rifling was applied only to small arms, usually for sporting purposes. The disadvantage of having, during loading, to force a soft lead (or lead-covered) ball down a bore of smaller diameter prevented its general employment for military use. In 1661 Prussia experimented with a gun rifled in thirteen shallow grooves, and in 1696 the elliptical bore—similar to the Lancaster—had been tried in Germany. In 1745 Robins was experimenting with rifled guns and elongated shot in England. During the Peninsular War about 1809, the only regiment (the “Rifle Brigade,” formerly called the 95th) equipped with rifled arms, found considerable difficulty in loading them with the old spherical lead
bullet, from the muzzle. In 1836 Russia made a large number of experiments with a rifled gun invented by Montigny, a Belgian; this was not a success, but in England the guns invented by Major Cavalli, in 1845, and by Baron Wahrendorff in 1846, obtained some measure of favour. Both these guns were breech-loaders. The Cavalli gun had a bore of 6·5 in. diameter; it was rifled in two grooves having a uniform twist of 1 in 25 calibres, and the elongated projectile had two ribs cast with it to fit the grooves, but no means were taken to prevent windage. The Wahrendorff gun had an enlarged chamber and the bore of 6·37 in. diameter was rifled in 2 grooves; the projectile had ribs similar to that for the Cavalli gun; but Wahrendorff had also tried lead-coated projectiles, the coating being attached by grooves undercut in the outside of the shell. In 1854 Lancaster submitted his plan of rifling; in this (fig. 22) the bore was made of an oval section which twisted round the axis of the gun from the breech to the muzzle; a projectile having an oval section was fired. Several old cast-iron guns bored on this system burst in the Crimean War from the projectile wedging in the gun. In 1855 Armstrong experimented with a breech-loading rifled gun, firing a lead-coated projectile. The rifling consisted of a large number of shallow grooves having a uniform twist of 1 in 38 calibres. When the gun was fired the lead-coated projectile, which was slightly larger in diameter than the bore of the gun, was forced into the rifling and so gave rotation to the elongated projectile.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 22.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 22.—Sections of Rifling.«/CTR»

Whitworth in 1857 brought out his hexagonal bore method of rifling and a projectile which was a good mechanical fit to the bore. Good results were obtained,PAGE:226but although this system had certain advantages it did not fulfil all requirements.

In 1863, England re-opened the whole question, and after
exhaustive trials of various inventions decided on the adoption
of the muzzle-loading type for all guns, with the French system
of rifling. This system was invented in 1842 by Colonel Treüille
de Beaulieu and consisted of a few wide and deep grooves which
gave rotation to a studded projectile. At the first trials two
grooves only were tried, but the number was afterwards increased
to three or more, as it was found that two grooves only
would not correctly centre the projectile. The adoption of the
muzzle-loading system with studded shot was a distinctly
retrograde step, as a considerable amount of clearance was
necessary between the bore and projectile for the purposes of
loading, and this resulted in the barrel being seriously eroded
by the rush of gas over the shot, and also led to a considerable
loss of energy. In the Wahrendorff and Armstrong systems
however the lead-coated projectiles entirely prevented windage,
besides which the projectile was perfectly centred and a high
degree of accuracy was obtained.

Shunt rifling was a brief attempt to make loading by the
muzzle easy without forfeiting the centring principle: in this
the rifling varied in width and in depth, at different portions of
the bore in such a manner that, during loading, the studs on the
projectile could move freely in the bore. When the gun was fired
the studs of the projectile were forced to travel in the shallow
part of the rifling, thus gripping and centring the projectile as
it left the muzzle.

With uniform rifling on the French system, the few studs—generally
two per groove—had to bear so high a pressure to
produce rotation that they sometimes gave way. This subject
was investigated by Captain (Sir Andrew) Noble, who showed
that by making the rifling an increasing twist, commencing with
no twist and gradually increasing until the necessary pitch was
obtained, the maximum pressure due to rotation was much
reduced. Increasing rifling was consequently adopted, with
beneficial results.

In order to prevent the heavy erosion due to windage, a gas
check was adopted which was attached to the base end of the
studded projectiles. In some guns the number of grooves of the
rifling was sufficiently great to admit of rotation being insured
by means of the gas check alone; in these guns studded projectiles
were not employed, but the gas check, called “automatic,”
to distinguish it from that fitted to studded projectiles
was usually indented around its circumference to correspond
with the rifling of the gun. It was found that the studless
projectile had considerably greater range and accuracy than the
studded projectile, with the additional advantage that the shell
was not weakened by the stud holes.

The introduction of the plain copper driving band for rotating
projectiles with breech-loading guns included a return to the
polygroove system with shallow grooves; this still exists, but the
continuous demand for greater power has had the effect of increasing
the number of grooves from that at first considered
necessary, in order to keep the rotating pressure on the driving
band within practical limits.

Many ingenious devices for giving rotation and preventing the
escape of gas past the projectile were tried in the early days of
modern rifling. Experiments of this nature still continue to be
made with a view to improving the shooting and to prevent the
erosion of the bore of the gun. Briefly considered, without
going into any detail of the numerous plans, all rotating devices
fitted to projectiles can be divided into three classes—the
“centring,” the “compressing” and the “expansion” systems.
The two last named almost invariably include the “centring”
type. Studded (fig. 23) and Whitworth (fig. 24) hexagonal
projectiles, which can freely slide in the bore, come under the
first system.

In the compression class the coating or rings on the projectile
are larger in diameter than the bore and when fired the coating
(or rings) is squeezed or engraved by the rifling to fit the bore—the
projectile is consequently also centred. The old-fashioned
lead-coated shell (fig. 25), and the modern system of plain copper
driving bands (fig. 26), come under this class. Most variety
exists in the expansion type, where the pressure of the powder
gas acts on the base of the projectile or on the driving ring and
compresses a lead, copper or asbestos ring into the rifling grooves.
One of the earliest was the Hotchkiss (1865) shell (fig. 27), in
which a separate base end B was driven forward by the gas
pressure and squeezed out the lead ring L into the rifling. The
automatic gas check (fig. 28), and the gas check driving band
(fig. 29), belong to this system; in the last the lip L is expanded
into the rifling groove. In fig. 30 a copper driving band is
associated with an asbestos packing A, contained in a canvas
bag or copper casing made in the form of a ring on the principle
of the de Bange obturator; but the results of this have not been
entirely satisfactory.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 23 - 30.png|width=390}}

«BR»
«SC»Figs«/SC». 23-30.—Projectiles for Rifled Ordnance.«/CTR»

It will be seen that with breech-loading guns the projectile
is better centred, and the copper driving band forms a definite
stop for the projectile; and, in consequence, the capacity of
the gun chamber is practically constant. In addition, the use
of a copper driving band ensures a uniform resistance while
this is being engraved and the projectile forced through the
gun, and also prevents the escape of gas. These elements
have a very great influence on the accuracy of the shooting, and
fully account for the vastly superior results obtained from breech-loading
ordnance when compared with the muzzle-loading type.
Driving bands of other materials such as cupro-nickel and
ferro-nickel have also been tried.

Many authorities believe that the best results are obtained
when the projectile is fitted with two bands, one near the head and
the other near the base, and no doubt it is better centred when
so arranged, but such shot can only be fired from guns rifled with
a uniform twist, and it must also not be forgotten that the groove
formed for the front band in the head of the projectile necessarily
weakens that part of the projectile which should be strongest.

Projectiles with a driving band at the base only can be fired
from guns rifled either uniformly or with increasing twist.

The introduction of «LN:cordite|cordite«/LN» («I»q.v.«/I») about 1890 again brought
into special prominence the question of rifling. The erosion
caused by this explosive soon obliterated the rifling for some 4
or 5 calibres at the breech end. The driving band of the shell
consequently started with indifferent engraving, and with the
increasing twist, then in general use, it was feared that the wear
would quickly render the gun useless. To remedy this the late
Commander Younghusband, R.N., proposed straight rifling,
which was adopted in 1895, for that portion of the rifling mostly
affected by the erosion, with a gradual increase of the twist
thence to the required pitch at the muzzle. Thus, any erosion
of the straight part of the rifling would not affect that portion
giving rotation, and it was argued that the gun would remain
efficient for a longer period. The defect in this system is that
when the projectile arrives at the end of the straight rifling it
has a considerable forward velocity and no rotation. Rotation
is then imparted by the increasing twist of rifling, and thePAGE:227resulting pressure on the engraved ribs of the driving band rises
suddenly to a maximum which, in high velocity guns, the
driving band is unable to resist. For this reason the straight
portion at the commencement of the rifling has been discarded,
and with high power guns firing a slow burning propellant uniform
rifling has again found favour.

It is evident that in order that a projectile may have a definite
amount of spin as it leaves the gun a determinate amount of work
must be imparted to rotate it during its passage along the rifled
portion of the bore. Put briefly, this work is the sum of the products
of the pressure between the engraved ribs on the driving band and
the lands of the rifling in the gun multiplied by the length of the
rifling over which this pressure acts. Sir Andrew Noble has proved
theoretically and experimentally (see «I»Phil. Mag.«/I», 1863 and 1873;
also «I»Proc. Roy. Soc.«/I» vol. 50) that the rotating pressure depends on
the propelling pressure of the powder gas on the base of the projectile
and on the curve of the rifling. If this curve was so proportioned
as to make the rotating pressure approximately constant along the
bore, the result was an increasing or progressive curve partaking
of the nature of a parabola, in which case it was usual to make the
last two or three calibres of rifling at the muzzle of uniform twist
for the purpose of steadying the projectile and aiding accuracy.

In uniform rifling the curve is a straight line and the rotating
pressure is consequently mainly proportional to the propelling gas
pressure. The pressure for rotation with uniform rifling therefore
rises to a maximum with the propelling pressure and falls as it
becomes less towards the muzzle.

With increasing rifling, owing to the angle of twist continually
changing as the projectile travels along the bore, the ribs originally
engraved by the rifling on the driving band are forced to change their
direction correspondingly, and this occurs by the front surface of
the ribs wearing away. They are therefore weakened considerably,
and it is found that with high velocities the engraved part of the
band often entirely disappears through this progressive action.

It will thus be seen that although an increasing twist of rifling
may be so arranged as to give uniform pressure, it is evident that
if wear takes place, the engraved rib becomes weaker to resist shearing
as the shot advances, and the rate of wear also increases owing to
the increase of heat by friction. With the very narrow driving
bands used for low velocity guns this action was not so detrimental.

With the long modern guns and the high muzzle velocities required,
the propelling gas pressures along the bore rise comparatively slowly
to a maximum and gradually fall until the muzzle is reached. The
pressure of the gas at all points of the bore is now considerably higher
than with the older patterns of B.L. guns.

For modern conditions, in order to obtain an increasing curve
giving an approximately constant driving pressure between the
rifling and driving band, this pressure becomes comparatively high.
The maximum rotating pressure, with uniform rifling, is certainly
somewhat higher, but not to a very great extent, and as it occurs
when the projectile is still moving slowly, the wear due to friction
will be correspondingly low; the pressure gradually falls until the
muzzle is reached, where it is much lower than with increasing
rifling. The projectile thus leaves the gun without any great
disturbance from the rifling pressure. Further, as the band is
engraved once for all with the angle it will have all along the bore
the pressure is distributed equally over the driving face of the
engraved ribs instead of being concentrated at the front of the ribs
as in progressive or increasing rifling.

The following formulae showing the driving pressures for increasing
and uniform rifling are calculated from Sir Andrew Noble’s formula,
which Sir G. Greenhill has obtained independently by another
method.

{{VERSE:Let R=total pressure, in tons, between rifling and driving band.
G=gaseous pressure, in tons, on the base of the projectile.
 𝑟=radius, in feet, of the bore.
μτ=coefficient of friction.
 ρ=radius of gyration of projectile.
 δ=angle between the normal to the driving surface of groove and radius.
 ℎ=the pitch of the rifling, in feet.
 𝑘=cotangent of angle of rifling at any point of rifling.
M=weight of the projectile in pounds.
 𝑧=the length, in feet, travelled by the projectile.}VERSE}

Then for parabolic rifling

«CTR»«MATH:\text{R} = 2\rho^2(\text{G}z+\text{M}v^2)«/MATH»/«MATH:{\frac{(r^2 k^2+4\rho^2 z^2) \sin \delta}{(4z^2 \sin^2 \delta+k^2)^{\tfrac{1}{2}}} + \frac{2\mu_1kz(\rho^2 - r^2)}{(4z^2 + k^2)^{\tfrac{1}{2}}}}«/MATH»«/CTR»

For uniform rifling

«CTR»«MATH:\text{R} = 2\pi\rho^2\text{G}«/MATH»/«MATH:{\frac{\mu_1(2\pi^2k-rh}{(1+k^2)^{\tfrac{1}{2}}} + \frac{2\pi\rho^2+rhk) \sin \delta}{(k^2 + \sin^2\delta)^{\tfrac{1}{2}}}}«/MATH»«/CTR»

For modern rifling δ=90°; therefore sin δ=1; by which the above
expressions may be considerably simplified.

For parabolic rifling

«CTR»R=2ρ²(4«I»z«/I»𝑧²+𝑘²)½(G𝑧 + M«I»v«/I»²)/𝑘𝑟²(𝑘−2μ₁𝑧)+2ρ²𝑧(2𝑧+μ₁𝑘).«/CTR»

For uniform rifling we can write ℎ𝑘=2π𝑟 and the expression reduces
to

«CTR»R=ρ²(1+𝑘²)½/μ₁«LG»(«/LG»ρ²𝑘−𝑟²/𝑘«LG»)«/LG»+ρ²«I»z«/I»)+𝑟².G.«/CTR»

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 31.png|width=360}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 31 —Pressure Curves (uniform and increasing twist).«/CTR»

Fig. 31 shows graphically the calculated results obtained for a
4·7-in. 50-calibre gun which has a shot travel of 17·3 ft.; the pressure
curve A is for a rifling twist increasing from 1 in 60 calibres at the
breech to 1 in 30 calibres at the muzzle; curve B is for rifling having
a uniform twist of 1 in 30 calibres.

It must be remembered that this comparison is typical for modern
conditions; with old-fashioned guns firing black or brown powder
the maximum rotating pressure for uniform rifling could attain a
value 50% above that for increasing rifling.

In this example, with the increasing twist there is a loss of energy
of about 11% of the total muzzle energy, and for the uniform
rifling a loss of about 8%. This explains the reason for uniformly
rifled guns giving a higher muzzle velocity than those with increasing
rifling, supposing the guns to be otherwise similar.

The pitch of the rifling or the amount of twist to be given to it
depends altogether on the length of the projectile; if this is short
a small amount of twist only is necessary, if long a greater amount
of twist must be arranged for, in order to spin the shell more rapidly.
Sir G. Greenhill has shown that the pitch of the rifling necessary to
keep a projectile in steady motion is independent of the velocity,
of the calibre, or of the length of the gun, but depends principally
on the length of the shell and on its description, so that for similar
projectiles one pitch would do for all guns.

Table I., on following page, has been calculated from Greenhill’s
formula.

In most modern guns the projectile varies in length from 3·5 to
4 calibres, so that the rifling is made to terminate at the muzzle
with a twist of 1 turn in 30 calibres, which is found ample to ensure
a steady flight to the projectile. In the United States a terminal
twist of 1 in 25 calibres is often adopted; Krupp also uses this in
some guns. With howitzers the projectile may be 4·5 calibres long,
and the rifling has to be made of a quicker twist to suit.

If the gun has, as is usually the case, a right-hand twist of rifling
the projectile drifts to the right; if it has a left-hand twist the
drift takes place to the left. The drift increases with
the range but in a greater ratio; further, the greater the
twist («I»i.e.«/I» the smaller the pitch of rifling) the greater the drift. On
the other hand the smooth B.L. projectiles «SH»Drift.«/SH» drift less than studded
M.L. projectiles.

To find the angle, usually called the «I»permanent angle of deflection«/I»,
at which the sights must be inclined to compensate for the drift,
a number of shots are fired at various ranges. The results obtained
are plotted on paper, and a straight line is then drawn from the point
representing the muzzle through the mean value of the plotted
curve.

The early guns were fired by inserting a red-hot wire into the vent, or by filling the vent with powder and firing it by a red-hot iron. Slow match held in a cleft stick afterwards took the place of the hot iron, and this again was replaced by a port-fire. Filling the vent with loose powder was inconvenient and slow, and to improve «SH»Firing arrangements.«/SH» matters the powder was placed in a paper, tin or quill tubePAGE:228which was simply pushed into the vent and fired by the slow
match or port-fire.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:110%;text-align:center"><caption>«CTR»«SC»Table I.«/SC»«/CTR»</caption><tr style="border:1px solid;font-size:90%"><td rowspan="2">Length of<br>projectile<br>in calibres.</td><td colspan="4">Minimum twist at muzzle of gun requisite to give stability of rotation<br>=one turn in 𝑛 calibres; or a pitch of 𝑛 calibres.</td></tr><tr style="border:1px solid;font-size:90%"><td>Cast-iron common<br>shell,<br>cavity=8/27, vol.<br>of shell<br>(s.g. of iron=7·2).</td><td>Palliser shell,<br>cavity=⅛ vol.<br>(s.g.=8·0).</td><td>Solid steel bullet <br>(s.g.=8·0).</td><td>Solid lead and tin<br>bullets of similar<br>composition<br> to M.-H. bullets<br>(s.g.=10·9)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>𝑛.</td><td>𝑛.</td><td>𝑛.</td><td>𝑛.</td></tr><tr><td>2·0</td><td>63·87</td><td>71·08</td><td>72·21</td><td>84·29</td></tr><tr><td>·1</td><td>59·84</td><td>66·59</td><td>67·66</td><td>78·98</td></tr><tr><td>·2</td><td>56·31</td><td>62·67</td><td>63·67</td><td>74·32</td></tr><tr><td>·3</td><td>53·19</td><td>59·19</td><td>60·14</td><td>70·20</td></tr><tr><td>·4</td><td>50·41</td><td>56·10</td><td>57·00</td><td>66·53</td></tr><tr><td>·5</td><td>47·91</td><td>53·32</td><td>54·17</td><td>63·24</td></tr><tr><td>·6</td><td>45·65</td><td>50·81</td><td>51·62</td><td>60·26</td></tr><tr><td>·7</td><td>43·61</td><td>48·53</td><td>49·30</td><td>57·55</td></tr><tr><td>·8</td><td>41·74</td><td>46·45</td><td>47·19</td><td>55·09</td></tr><tr><td>·9</td><td>40·02</td><td>44·54</td><td>45·25</td><td>52·72</td></tr><tr><td>3·0</td><td>38·45</td><td>42·79</td><td>43·47</td><td>50·74</td></tr><tr><td>·1</td><td>36·99</td><td>41·16</td><td>41·82</td><td>48·82</td></tr><tr><td>·2</td><td>35·64</td><td>39·66</td><td>40·30</td><td>47·04</td></tr><tr><td>·3</td><td>34·39</td><td>38·27</td><td>38·84</td><td>45·38</td></tr><tr><td>·4</td><td>33·22</td><td>36·97</td><td>37·56</td><td>43·84</td></tr><tr><td>·5</td><td>32·13</td><td>35·75</td><td>36·33</td><td>42·40</td></tr><tr><td>·6</td><td>31·11</td><td>34·62</td><td>35·17</td><td>41·05</td></tr><tr><td>·7</td><td>30·15</td><td>33·55</td><td>34·09</td><td>39·79</td></tr><tr><td>·8</td><td>29·25</td><td>32·55</td><td>33·07</td><td>38·61</td></tr><tr><td>·9</td><td>28·40</td><td>31·61</td><td>32·11</td><td>37·48</td></tr><tr><td>4·0</td><td>27·60</td><td>30·72</td><td>31·21</td><td>36·43</td></tr><tr><td>·1</td><td>26·85</td><td>29·88</td><td>30·36</td><td>35·43</td></tr><tr><td>·2</td><td>26·13</td><td>29·08</td><td>29·55</td><td>34·49</td></tr><tr><td>·3</td><td>25·45</td><td>28·33</td><td>28·78</td><td>33·59</td></tr><tr><td>·4</td><td>24·81</td><td>27·61</td><td>28·05</td><td>32·74</td></tr><tr><td>·5</td><td>24·20</td><td>26·93</td><td>27·36</td><td>31·94</td></tr><tr><td>·6</td><td>23·65</td><td>26·32</td><td>26·74</td><td>31·21</td></tr><tr><td>·7</td><td>23·06</td><td>25·66</td><td>26·08</td><td>30·44</td></tr><tr><td>·8</td><td>22·53</td><td>25·08</td><td>25·48</td><td>29·74</td></tr><tr><td>·9</td><td>22·03</td><td>24·51</td><td>24·91</td><td>29·07</td></tr><tr><td>5·0</td><td>21·56</td><td>23·98</td><td>24·36</td><td>28·44</td></tr><tr><td>·1</td><td>21·08</td><td>23·46</td><td>23·84</td><td>27·83</td></tr><tr><td>·2</td><td>20·64</td><td>22·97</td><td>23·34</td><td>27·24</td></tr><tr><td>·3</td><td>20·22</td><td>22·50</td><td>22·86</td><td>26·68</td></tr><tr><td>·4</td><td>19·81</td><td>22·05</td><td>22·40</td><td>26·14</td></tr><tr><td>·5</td><td>19·42</td><td>21·61</td><td>21·96</td><td>25·63</td></tr><tr><td>·6</td><td>19·04</td><td>21·19</td><td>21·53</td><td>25·13</td></tr><tr><td>·7</td><td>18·68</td><td>20·79</td><td>21·12</td><td>24·66</td></tr><tr><td>·8</td><td>18·33</td><td>20·40</td><td>20·73</td><td>24·20</td></tr><tr><td>·9</td><td>18·00</td><td>20·03</td><td>20·35</td><td>23·75</td></tr><tr><td>6·0</td><td>17·67</td><td>19·67</td><td>19·98</td><td>23·33</td></tr><tr><td>7·0</td><td>14·99</td><td>16·68</td><td>16·95</td><td>19·78</td></tr><tr><td>8·0</td><td>13·02</td><td>14·48</td><td>14·72</td><td>17·18</td></tr><tr><td>9·0</td><td>11·50</td><td>12·80</td><td>13·00</td><td>15·18</td></tr><tr><td>10·0</td><td>10·31</td><td>11·47</td><td>11·65</td><td>13·60</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
The first attempt to fire guns by mechanical means was made
in 1781 by Sir Charles Douglas, who fitted flint locks, similar
to musket locks, but with the trigger actuated by a lanyard, to the
guns on board his ship H.M.S. “Duke.” A double flint lock
introduced in 1818 by Sir Howard Douglas, R.A., continued to
be used until about 1842, when it was replaced by a percussion
lock invented by an American named Hiddens. In this lock one
pull on the lanyard caused the hammer to fall and strike a percussion
patch or cap hung on a small hook over the vent, and
afterwards caused the hammer to be drawn backwards out
of the way of the blast from the vent. These somewhat
clumsy contrivances were swept away on the adoption in 1853
of friction tubes (see «LN:Ammunition|Ammunition«/LN»), which had simply to be
placed in the vent and the friction bar withdrawn by means of
a lanyard.

Friction tubes continued to be used with all muzzle-loading
ordnance except in one or two natures with which the charge
was ignited axially at the breech of the gun. In these a vent
sealing friction tube retained in the vent by a tube holder was
employed. With breech-loading field guns ordinary friction
tubes were also used until the introduction of cordite, which
eroded the vents so quickly by the escape of the gases that vent
sealing tubes became a necessity.

In all other breech-loading ordnance and with the latest
pattern field guns the firing gear forms part of the breech
mechanism.

All modern breech mechanisms form two groups («I»a«/I») the sliding
type as with the Krupp wedge system, («I»b«/I») the swinging type as in
the interrupted screw system. Either type may be
used with B.L. guns (i.e. those with which the charge is
not contained in a metallic cartridge case) and Q.F. guns
(«I»i.e.«/I» those with which a metallic cartridge «SH»Breech mechanism.«/SH» case is used).

Sliding mechanisms may be divided into two forms: (1) those
having the block or wedge sliding horizontally, and (2) those in
which the block works in a vertical direction, (1) is that used
principally by Krupp; (2) is best illustrated by the Hotchkiss
system for small Q.F. guns; the Nordenfelt, Skoda and the Driggs-Schroeder
mechanisms for small Q.F. guns are an adaptation of the
same principle.

The Krupp gear is in reality an improved Cavalli mechanism;
it is capable of being worked rapidly, is simple, with strong parts
not liable to derangement, except perhaps the obturator. The
breech end of the gun, however, occupies valuable space especially
when these guns are mounted in the restricted turrets or gun houses
on board ship.

Later it will be seen that owing to the difficulty of arranging a
convenient and efficient obturating device for the smokeless nitropowders,
which have a peculiarly severe, searching effect, a metal
cartridge case has to be used with even the heaviest guns; naturally
this assumes large dimensions for the 305 m/m. gun.

The wedge (fig. 32) is housed in the breech piece, which covers
the breech part of the barrel, made very massive and extended to
the rear of the barrel. A slot, cut transversely through the extended
portion, forms a seat for the sliding block. The slot is formed so
that its front is a plane surface perpendicular to the axis of the gun,
while the rear is rounded and slightly inclined to the axis. One or
more ribs similarly inclined on the upper and lower surfaces of the
slot guide the breech block in its movements. For traversing the
block a quick pitched screw is fitted to its upper surface and works
in a nut attached to the upper part of the slot (in small guns this
traversing screw is dispensed with, as the block can be easily moved
by hand). As the rear seat of the sliding block is inclined, there is
a tendency for the block to be moved sideways, when the gun is
fired by the pressure in the chamber acting on the front face of the
wedge; this is prevented by a locking gear, consisting of a cylinder,
having a series of interrupted collars, which is mounted on a screw.
When the breech has been traversed into position, the collars are
rotated, by a cross handle at the side of the block, into grooves cut
in the rear surface of the slot; a further movement makes the
screw jam the collars hard in contact with the gun and secures the
breech. With small guns having no traversing gear a short strong
screw takes the place of the collars, and on the handle being turned
enters a threaded portion at the rear surface of the slot, actuates the
breech for the last (or first in opening) portion of its movement in
closing and secures it. To open the gun the movements are reversed.

The gun is fired by a friction tube, screwed into an axial vent bored
through the sliding block, or, in field guns, by a copper friction tube
through an oblique vent drilled through the top of the breech end
of the gun and through the block.

There is also fitted in some guns a percussion arrangement for
firing a percussion tube.

The obturation is effected by a Broadwell ring or some modification
of it; this is placed in a recess cut in the gun and rests against
a hard steel plate fitted in the breech block.

For modern Krupp mechanisms, for use with cartridge cases, the
arrangement (fig. 33) is very similar to that described above, but
some improvements have added to its simplicity. The transporting
screw is fitted with a strong projection which, at the end of the
movement for closing the breech, locks with a recess cut in the upper
surface of the slot and secures the breech. The extra locking device
is consequently dispensed with. The firing gear consists of a striker
fitted in the sliding block in line with the axis of the gun; the
striker is pushed back by a lever contained in the block and, on
release, is driven forward against the primer of the cartridge case by
a spiral spring.

In the Hotchkiss gun the mechanism has a vertical breech block
of a rectangular section. The actuating lever F (fig. 34) is on the
right side of the gun, and connected to a powerful crank arm C
working in a groove E cut on the right side of the breech block.
By pulling the lever towards the rear, the crank arm forces
down the block A and extracts the fired case by an extractor X,
which is actuated by a cam groove Y cut on one side or on
both sides of the block. As the mechanism is opened the hammer H
is cocked ready for the next round. To close the mechanism
the lever is pushed over to the front, and by releasing the trigger
sear by pulling the lanyard the hammer falls and fires the cap of
the cartridge case.

Automatic gear is now generally fitted which opens the breech
as the gun runs up after recoil and extracts the fired case by means
of a supplementary mechanism and strong spring actuated by the
recoil of the gun, and on pushing a new cartridge into the gun the
breech which was retained by the extractor is released and closes
automatically.PAGE:229The Nordenfelt mechanism consists of a breech block (fig. 35)
and a wedge to secure it. A hand lever on the shaft is pulled to
the rear, and this works the action cam, which pulls down the
wedge; the breech block is then caused to rotate and falls back to
the rear. This motion of the breech block actuates the extractor
and extracts the case. While the wedge is being withdrawn the
firing pin is pulled back and cocked for the next round. The
mechanism is closed by reversing the hand lever; this rotates the
breech block upwards and pushes home the cartridge case, and the
wedge is then forced up and secures the breech block.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 32.png|width=620}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 32.—Krupp Breech Action.«/CTR»

These small type Q.F. guns, which were introduced to cope with
torpedo boats, are now, however, of little account, since experiment
has proved that nothing smaller than a 12-pounder is sufficient so
to injure a modern torpedo boat as to stop it. Most of these small
guns are therefore in the English and in some other Services being
converted into “sub-calibre” guns for exercise purposes. These
sub-calibre guns retain their ordinary breech mechanism, but the
bodies are fitted with a strong steel plug screwed on the outside
in a similar manner to the breech screw of the parent gun. The
sub-calibre gun is placed in the parent gun and the screwed plug
engages in the threads of the breech opening.

There has been a gradual development of ideas regarding the
repelling power required by a vessel against torpedo boat attack.
The 12-pounder Q.F. 40-calibre guns were replaced by the more
powerful 12-pounder Q.F. 50-calibre gun; this again by the 4-in.
high power gun of 50 calibres, and now 6-in. guns are being used.

One other form of sliding mechanism is of importance owing to
its adoption for the 75 m/m. French long recoil field gun (see below:
«I»Field equipments«/I»). This mechanism is on the Nordenfelt eccentric
screw system and is very similar to that proposed by Clay about
1860; it has a breech screw (fig. 36) of large diameter mounted in
the breech opening, which is eccentric to the bore. For loading, the
breech block has a longitudinal opening cut through it, so that when
the mechanism is in the open
position this opening coincides
with the chamber, while a half
turn of the breech screw brings
its solid part opposite the
chamber and closes the gun.
The mechanism is very simple
and strong, but it is only
suitable for small Q.F. guns
using cartridge cases; the
firing gear is similar to that
applied to other types of
mechanism, and the fired case
is extracted by an extractor
actuated by the face of the
breech screw as it is opened.

With the swinging type of
breech mechanism we are confronted
with numberless patterns,
many of undoubted
merit and claiming certain
advantages over others, and
all showing the vast amount
of ingenuity expended in so
designing them that they may
be as simple, and, at the same
time, as effective and quick
acting as possible. It is impossible to deal with all these, and therefore
only the more important systems will be described. The special
feature of this type is that the breech is closed by an interrupted
breech screw; the screw is either supported in a carrier ring or tray
hinged near the breech opening, or on a carrier arm which is hinged
near the outer circumference of the gun.

The screw may be of the cylindric interrupted, Welin and coned
types; these, or their modifications, practically embrace the various
forms used. The cylindric form (fig. 37) is the simplest; it consists
of a strong screwed plug engaging with a corresponding screw
thread cut on the interior of the breech opening of the gun. The
screw surface of the breech plug is cut away in sections equally
divided and alternating with the threaded portions. The screw
surface of the breech opening is similarly cut away, so that the
plug can be pushed nearly home into the breech opening without
trouble; by then revolving
the breech screw through a
small angle the screwed portions
of the plug and breech
opening engage. Thus if three
screwed sections alternate with
three plain sections the
angle of revolution necessary
to ensure a full engagement
of the screw surfaces will be
60°. The Welin screw (fig. 38)
is an ingenious adaptation
of the cylindric type; in this
the surface is divided into
sections each formed of two
or three cylindrical screwed
steps with a single plain portion;
thus if there are three
sections, each section of which
has one plain division and
two screwed divisions, there will be in all six screwed portions and
three plain. The breech opening is correspondingly formed so
that the screwed threads would fully engage with 40° of movement.
There is consequently a greater amount of screwed circumferential
surface with the Welin screw than with the ordinary cylindric
interrupted type; the latter form has 50% screw surface while the
Welin has 60%. For equal screw surface the Welin can therefore
be made shorter.

For medium guns the Elswick type of coned screw (fig. 39) has
found much favour, and this mechanism has been fitted to guns of
all calibres from 3-inch to 6-inch, both for the British and numerous
other governments. The coned breech screw is formed with the
front part conical and the rear cylindrical, to facilitate its entrance
into the gun, and also its exit; this form, moreover, is taken advantage
of by cutting the interruptions in the screwed surface
alternately on the coned part and on the cylindrical part, so that
there is a screwed surface all round the circumference of the breech
screw. By this means the stress is taken all round the circumference,
both of the breech screw and in the gun, instead of in portions
alternately, as with other forms.

The Bofors breech screw is a modification. The surface is formed
of a truncated ogive instead of a cylinder and cone, and the threaded
portions are not alternate.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 33.png|width=620}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 33.—Krupp Breech Action.«/CTR»

In the older types of mechanism for heavy B.L. guns the breech
was opened in from three to four different operations which involved
considerable loss of time. Fig. 40 shows the general type for 9·2-in.,
lo-in. and 12-in. B.L. guns. To open the breech the cam lever C
was folded up so that it engaged the pin B in connexion with the
ratchet lever E. This was worked and so disengaged the breech
screw from the threads cut in the gun; the cam lever was then
folded down as to to start the breech screw, and the winch handle Q
rotated and so withdrew the screw and swung it clear of the breech
opening. During these operations the firing lock was actuated and
made safe, but the fired tube had to be extracted by hand. To close
the gun these various operations must be reversed, and to open or close
the gun would certainly occupy at least half a minute with trained men.

To compare with this a modern 12-in. breech mechanism is shown
in fig. 41. In order to open this breech it is only necessary to turnPAGE:230the handwheel continuously in one direction, and to close it again
the motion of the handwheel is simply reversed; either closing or
opening the breech by hand occupies about 6 seconds. Supposing
the breech closed, the handwheel when rotated gives motion to the
link G through the worm wheel S and crank F. By this means the
tooth B is moved from its extreme left position to the right, and
so disengages the breech screw A from the threads in the gun; the
rack A² on the breech screw then comes into gear with the pinion E
and draws the breech screw out of the gun into the carrier ring C,
which finally swings on the axis pin and clears the breech opening.
While the opening is being performed the firing lock L is
operated by the cam groove A³; this puts the firing mechanism,
either electric or percussion, to safety by withdrawing the firing
needle, extracts the fired tube and leaves the primer chamber open
for a fresh primer. All these operations are performed in the reverse
order on closing.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 34.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 34.—Hotchkiss Q.F. Breech Mechanism.«/CTR»
With both these types of mechanism the de Bange system of
obturation, with the pad only slightly coned, is used.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 35.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 35.—Nordenfeldt Q.F. Breech Mechanism.«/CTR»

With smaller guns the mechanism is simpler, as less power is
required for opening the breech. Thus, with the 6-in. B.L. gun Mark IV.,
introduced about 1885 (fig. 42) the breech is opened in three
separate operations—(«I»a«/I») the cam lever, which also locks the breech,
is raised into the vertical position and pulled over to the left; this
disengages the screw threads; («I»b«/I») the cam lever is folded down so
that the cam acting on the rear face of the gun releases the de Bange
obturator, and the screw is then pulled by hand through the carrier
ring out of the breech; («I»c«/I») the carrier ring and breech screw are
revolved together to the right, clear of the breech opening.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 36.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 36.—Eccentric Screw, Breech Mechanism.«/CTR»

In a modern 6-in. gun fitted with de Bange obturator all these
operations are combined and the mechanism (fig. 43) worked by a
horizontal hand lever which is moved from left to right through an
angle of about 200°. The hand lever A moves a link B connected to
a pin C on the breech screw D and disengages the screw from the gun;
a small lateral movement is then given to the axis pin of the carrier
so as to allow the obturator pad E to swing out of its seating; when
this is quite free, the whole mechanism revolves on the axis pin and
thus clears the breech opening. The firing lock F is actuated at the
same time and ejects the fired tube G. A new tube is inserted while
the gun is being loaded, so that immediately the breech is closed the
charge can be fired without loss of time. In the old mechanisms the
breech had to be closed first, and the firing tube inserted after.PAGE:231The breech mechanism for Q.F. guns firing metallic cartridge
cases is worked on similar principles, but is somewhat simpler than
that for the de Bange obturation, due principally to the fact of the
firing primer being already contained in the cartridge case when this
is introduced into the gun.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 37.png|width=380}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 37.—Interrupted Breech Screw—Cylindrical.«/CTR»

In the English service the later patterns of breech mechanism for
medium and heavy B.L. guns have a Welin screw, with a “steep
cone” de Bange obturator, supported on a carrier arm. This
arrangement allows the mechanism (fig. 44) to swing clear of the
breech opening immediately the threads of the breech screw are
disengaged from those in the breech in a similar manner to the
Q.F. guns fitted with a cone screw. The mechanism is actuated by
the handwheel L which rotates the hinge pin; this in turn, through
gearing, moves a crank arm D connected, by a link B, to the pin on
the breech screw. By continuously moving the handwheel the
link B is drawn towards the hinge pin until the breech screw threads
are disengaged; the catch C then drops into a pocket on the breech
screw and fixes it to the carrier arm. The whole of the mechanism
then rotates around the hinge pin and leaves the breech open ready
for loading. As the breech screw threads are being disengaged the
electric or percussion lock W is operated by a cam groove in a
similar manner to that already described. In the latest modification
of this mechanism a roller at the end of the crank arm D works a
long lever connected to the breech screw by two pins. This forms
what is termed a “pure-couple” mechanism and it is claimed that
greater ease of working is ensured by its use. While the loading is
going on a new firing tube is
placed in the vent, so that on
closing the gun, by turning the
handwheel in the opposite
direction, the gun is ready for
firing. For 9·2-in. guns and
those of smaller calibre the
handwheel is replaced by a
hand lever pivoted on the
carrier (fig. 45). By giving
this lever a single motion from
left to right the mechanism is
opened.

For 6-in. and 4-in. guns
a shot support is attached
to the breech face which
is operated by the breech
mechanism so that when
the breech is open the shot
support is in position for loading, and it falls out of the way when
the breech is being closed.

In the larger types of all breech mechanisms ball bearings are
employed in various parts, such as the hinge pin bearings, &c., to
reduce friction and in most of the modern heavy guns on board
ship the breech mechanism is arranged to be worked by a hydraulic
cylinder placed on the breech face, or by a small hydraulic engine
or electric motor placed in some convenient position on the mounting.
The hand gear, however, is always retained for emergency and a
clutch is provided so that it can be put into action at a moment’s
notice.

The Welin screw is largely used in the United States, but in heavy
guns the ordinary cone (not “steep cone”) de Bange obturator is
employed. The screw is mounted either in a carrier ring or on a
carrier tray. In France the ordinary type of interrupted screw is
adopted and this rests in a carrier tray. The operations of opening
and closing are very similar to those already described.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 38.png|width=390}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 38.—Welin Breech Screw.«/CTR»

All the recent patterns of mechanism have an extractor fitted
to extract the empty cartridge case with Q.F. guns or the fired
tube with B.L. guns. In Q.F. field guns it generally takes the form
of a lever working on an axis pin. The longer arm of the lever is
formed into a jaw which rests on the inner face of the breech opening
beneath the rim of the cartridge case, and the short arm is so
arranged that when the breech is opened the carrier, in swinging
mechanisms, or the breech block itself, in sliding systems, suddenly
comes in contact with it; the long arm is thus jerked backwards
and extracts the case. In B.L. mechanisms the tube extractor is

arranged on the same principle but in this case usually forms part
of the box slide, «I»i.e.«/I» that portion of the mechanism attached by
interrupted collars to the rear end of the vent axial, in which the
firing lock slides as it is actuated by the opening or closing of the
breech mechanism. When the breech is being opened the firing pin
of the lock is drawn back to safety and the lock is moved aside from
over the tube; a tripper then actuates the extractor and ejects the
fired tube. The extractor and tripper are so contrived that when a
new tube is pushed home the extractor is also pushed back into the
closed position, or, if the tube is somewhat stiff to insert, the action
of closing the mechanism moves the lock over the primer and forces
it home.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 39.png|width=600}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 39.—Elswick Coned Screw.«/CTR»

The firing lock used in B.L. guns is an important part of the
mechanism. They are all designed on the same principle, with
a view to safety and rapidity, and may be regarded as a miniature
sliding breech mechanism. In the older types the lock or its substitute
was manipulated by hand, and with electric firing the wires
from the tubes were joined up to the loose ends of the firing circuit;PAGE:232safety depended therefore on everything being in order and all operations correctly performed.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 41.png|width=746}}

«BR»
   «SC»Fig«/SC». 41.—12-in. Gun, Breech Mechanism.«/CTR»

The gun could, however, be fired before the breech was properly secured and a serious accident caused; to prevent this all the movements of modern locks are arranged to be automatic, and wireless electric tubes are used so that immediately the breech mechanism commences to open, the lock itself is moved in the box slide so as to uncover the vent opening. During the first part of this movement a foot on thePAGE:233striker rides up an incline I (fig. 45) on the box slide and thus
pushes back the striker from contact with the tube. The extractor
described above is actuated at the same time. Most locks
consist of a steel frame with a socket for containing the striker
and main spring. They are contrived so as to be capable of firing
both electric and percussion tubes, but others are arranged for
firing only electric, separate locks being employed for use with
percussion tubes. The construction of both is very similar, but
with the percussion lock, or the combined lock, a trigger is provided
which drops into a notch in the striker when this is pulled back by
the lugs E E (fig. 45) on the outer attachment of the striker. On
the trigger being pulled by a lanyard the striker is released and
fires the tube.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 40.png|width=460}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 40. — Breech Mechanisms, Heavy Guns.«BR»«BR»

{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 42.png|width=370}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 42.— Breech Mechanism, 6-in. B.L. Mark IV.«/CTR»

For Q.F. guns with interrupted or coned breech screws the
striker is contained in the breech screw, but, in order to provide for
safety, a small lever cam or other contrivance is fitted
which, when the mechanism commences to open, is
operated by the hand lever and withdraws the striker
from contact with the primer inserted in the cartridge
case.

The striker consists of a steel needle, with the stem
insulated by ebonite or some similar material, contained
in an outer steel sheath. The sheath is formed with
a foot or lug which is acted upon by the safety gear; a
collar is also provided for taking the thrust of the main
spring.

Another form of lock now much in favour, especially
for field-gun mechanisms, is that known as a trip lock.
It is mainly used for percussion firing but can also be
combined for use with electric tubes. In this pattern the
striker is withdrawn, cocked and released by the continuous
pull of a hand lever attached to the mounting
or by a lanyard attached to the lock. Should a miss-fire
occur the striker may be actuated as often as necessary
by releasing the hand lever or lanyard and again giving
a continuous pull (fig. 46).

In all modern heavy guns, especially when firing to
windward, there is a tendency, when the breech is opened
rapidly after firing, for a sheet of flame to issue
from the open breech. It was practically unknown
with the old black powders, but is of
frequent occurrence with all smokeless propellants. If «SH»Back flash.«/SH» the gun is loaded immediately after the breech is opened
the fresh charge may be ignited and an accident caused.
Several serious accidents have already been traced to this
cause, notably one on the United States battleship
“Missouri” on 13th April 1904, when 33 lives were lost.
The flame is due to the large amount of highly heated
carbonic oxide remaining in the gun from the explosion of
the charge; this mixing with the oxygen of the air when
the breech is opened burns rapidly as a sheet of flame
in rear of the gun, and should wind be blowing down the gun the
action is more intense. By looking into the gun from the muzzle,
before the breech is opened, the gas can often be seen burning
with a pale-blue flame as it slowly mixes with air and a
curious singing noise is heard at the same time. It is now usual to
fit a special apparatus on the gun, so that directly the breech is
partly opened a blast of compressed air is allowed to enter the
rear end of the chamber and thus sweep the whole of the
residual gas out at the muzzle.

The purpose of the obturator is to render the breech
end of the gun gas-tight, and to prevent any escape of
gas past the breech mechanism. In the first 
Armstrong B.L. gun this object was attained 
by fitting to the breech block a copper ring coned on
the exterior; the coned surface was forcibly pressed by «SH»Obturators.«/SH» screwing up the breech screw against a corresponding
copper ring fitted at the breech opening of the gun
chamber. It is only possible to use this method when
the copper surfaces can be jammed together by a powerful
screw.

Except the above, all obturators in use are arranged
to act automatically, «I»i.e.«/I» the pressure set up in the
gun when it is fired expands the arrangement and seals
the opening; immediately the projectile leaves the bore
the pressure is relieved and the obturator, by its elasticity,
regains its original shape, so that the breech mechanism
can be opened or closed with ease. In the French
naval service B.L. guns have been in use since 1864, and
the system of obturation was arranged on the same expansion
principle as the leather packing ring of the hydraulic press. A steel
ring A (fig. 47) of cupped form was fastened by a screwed plug to a
thick steel plate, carried on the face of the breech screw, so that it
could rotate when the breech screw was rotated in opening or closing
the gun. The outer lip of the cup fitted against a slightly coned
seating formed in the breech end of the gun chamber. When the
gun was fired, the gas pressure expanded the cup ring and forced
it into close bearing against the seating in the gun and the thick
steel plate on the breech screw, thus preventing any escape of gas.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 43.png|width=460}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 43.—Breech Mechanism, Modern 6-in. Gun.«/CTR»

Very similar to this was the Elswick cup obturator (fig. 48) introduced
by the Elswick Ordnance Company in 1881; its rear surface
was flat and it was held by a central bolt against the front of the
breech screw which was slightly rounded. The cup yielded to the
gas pressure until it was supported by the breech screw; this
action expanded the lip against a copper seating, let into the gun,
which could be renewed when necessary. Many of both types
are still in use and act perfectly efficiently if carefully treated.
The use of modern smokeless powder renders them and similar
devices, such as the Broadwell ring (fig. 49), &c., peculiarly liable to
damage, as a slight abrasion of the lip of the cup or ring, or of its
seating, allows gas to escape, and so accentuates the defect with
each round fired. Unless, therefore, the fault be immediately
remedied considerable damage may be caused to the gun. The
Broadwell gas ring is still in use in the French naval service, where
it is made of copper (fig. 50), and also of steel in a modified form
(Piorkowski) in the German service (fig. 51); in the last-named service,
owing to the defect already named, all the latest guns, both light
and heavy, use metal cartridge cases. In the French navy, as inPAGE:234most other services, cartridge cases are used for the smaller and medium guns only.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 44.png|width=600}}

«BR»
«FS[92%]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 44.—English modern Breech Mechanism, for heavy and medium guns.«/FS»«/CTR»

One of the most efficient obturators not liable to damage is the
plastic device introduced by Colonel de Bange of the French
service and adopted by the French army and also by the British
and other governments. It consists of a pad (fig. 52) made up of
a strong annular-shaped canvas bag A, containing a mixture of
asbestos fibre and mutton suet; the bag with its contents is placed
in a properly formed die and subjected to hydraulic pressure by
which it becomes hard and firm. The pad so made is then placed on
the front of the breech screw B, and it is protected on its faces by
disks C, C, of metallic tin or copper having steel wedge rings on
the outer edges; the circumference of the complete pad and disks is
generally only slightly coned and fits into a corresponding seating
formed at the breech end of the chamber, the canvas of the circumference
of the pad being in immediate contact with the seat. In
the English service the steep cone pattern (fig. 53) of de Bange
obturator is used with mechanisms having the Welin screw. In
front of the pad is placed a strong steel disk formed with a spindle,
and called a mushroom head D, the spindle passing through the
hole in the pad and through the breech screw, being secured in
rear by a nut. The firing vent is generally drilled through the
mushroom head and spindle and the part is then termed a “vent
axial.” On the gun being fired the gas exerts a great pressure on
the mushroom head, which compresses the pad and squeezes it
out on the circumference into close contact with the seating, thus
forming a perfect gas seal. It is found that this apparently delicate
arrangement will stand considerable ill-usage and act perfectly for
an indefinite time, and, as it is easily replaced, it is regarded as one
of the best and most reliable forms of obturator. In some countries
the Freyre obturator is in use; this has a somewhat similar axial
head to the de Bange, but the asbestos pad is replaced by a single
steel wedge ring into which the axial head fits. On firing the gun
the head is forced into the wedge ring and expands it against the
seating in the gun.

One other means of obturation has to be considered, viz.
metallic cartridge cases. These are made of a kind of brass;
aluminium cases have been experimented with, but have not proved
satisfactory. The case (fig. 54) acts on the same principle as the
cup obturation and is extremely efficient for the purpose; moreover,
they have certain advantages conducive to rapid firing when
used for small guns. The idea has developed from the use of such
cartridges in small arms, and larger cartridges of the same type
were introduced for 3-pounder and 6-pounder guns by Hotchkiss
and Nordenfelt about the year 1880 for the purpose of rapid
firing against torpedo boats. Then in
1886 the Elswick Company produced
a 36-pounder (soon converted to a
45-pounder) of 4·7-in. calibre with the
powder charge contained in metallic
cases, and about 1888 a 6-in. 100-pounder
gun using similar cartridges.
A special advantage of the cartridge
case is that it contains the firing primer
by which the charge is ignited and consequently
renders the firing gear of the
gun more simple; on the other hand,
should a miss-fire occur the gun must
be opened to replace the primer. This
is a proceeding liable to produce an
accident, unless a long enough time is
allowed to elapse before attempting to
open the breech; guns having de Bange
obturators and firing tubes inserted
after the breech is closed are therefore
safer in this respect.

Some means of extracting the case
after firing must be fitted to the gun;
this is simple enough with small guns,
but with those of heavy natures the
extractor becomes a somewhat ponderous
piece of gear.

Metallic cases of a short pattern
have been tried for large calibre guns;
although their action is quite efficient,
they are difficult to handle, and if a case
must be used it is preferable to employ
a fairly long one. It was for this reason
that in England up to 1898 it was
considered that for guns above 6-in.
calibre the de Bange obturation was the
most advantageous. Since then the de
Bange obturator has been employed in
guns of 4-in. calibre and above, the cartridge
case being retained only for 3-in.
and smaller guns. Krupp, however, uses
cartridge cases with all guns even up
to 12-in. calibre, but this is undoubtedly
due to the difficulties, which have already
been noticed, attending the use of
smokeless powder with the ordinary
forms of obturation applicable to the
wedge breech system. In the most
modern Krupp 12-in. guns the charge
is formed in two pieces; the piece
forming the front portion of the charge
is contained in a consumable envelope,
while the rear portion is contained in
a brass cartridge case, which forms the
obturator, about 48 in. long.

It will be seen that such large and
heavy cases add to the difficulties which
occur in handling or stowing the ammunition
of large calibre guns, and although the use of cartridge
cases with small guns adds to their rapidity of firing this is not
the case with heavy guns. It seems, therefore, that the balance of
advantages is certainly in favour of the de Bange system, for all
guns except those of small calibre. With ordinary field guns cartridge
cases are now considered obligatory owing to their convenience
in loading.

While the ordinary types of plastic obturators last for an indefinite
time a cartridge case can be used for a limited number of
rounds only, depending on the calibre of the gun; with field guns
from ten to twenty rounds or even more may be fired from one
case if care is taken to reform it after each round; with large
guns they will not, of course, fire so many. Cartridge cases are
an expensive addition to the ammunition, so that there should be
no doubt about the advantages they offer before they are definitely
adopted for heavy guns.

The rapidity with which modern guns can be fired and the
enormous energy they develop is especially striking when onePAGE:235considers the same facts in connexion with the early guns.
Favé states in his «I»Histoire et tactique des trois armes«/I» (p. 23)
that during the invasion of Italy in 1494 by Charles VIII.
the guns were so unwieldy and the firing so slow «SH»Range and power.«/SH» that the damage caused by one shot could be repaired
before the next could be fired. The range, too, about
100 yds. for battering purposes, now seems absurdly short;
even at Waterloo 1200 yds. was all that separated the antagonists
at the commencement of the battle, but they approached to within
200 or 300 yds. without suffering serious loss from either musketry
or gun fire. Nelson fought his ships side by side with the enemy’s;
and fifty years after Nelson’s day a range of 1000 yds. at sea
was looked upon as an extreme distance at which to engage an
enemy. Contrast this with the range of 12,000 yds. at which the
opposing Russian and Japanese fleets more than once commenced
a naval battle in 1904, while
the critical part of the action
took place at a distance of
7000 yds.

These long ranges naturally
intensified the requirements
of the British and other
navies, and, so that they
shall not be outclassed and
beaten by an enemy’s long-range
fire, guns of continually
increasing power are
demanded. In 1900 a 12-in.
gun of 40 calibres was considered
all that was necessary.
After the Russo-Japanese
War the demand rose first for
a 45-calibre gun and then for
a 50-calibre gun, and muzzle
velocities from about 2400 f.s.
to about 3000 f.s. In 1910
greater shell power was demanded,
to meet which new
type guns of 13·5-in. and
14-in. calibre were being made.

In the days of M.L. heavy
guns one of the most difficult
problems was that of loading.
The weight of the shell and
powder was such that some
mechanical power had to be
employed for moving and
ramming them home, and as
hydraulic gear had by that
date been introduced it was
generally used for all loading
operations. To load, the guns had to be run back until their
muzzles were within the turret, or, in the case of the 16-in.
80-ton guns of H.M.S. “Inflexible,” until they were just outside
the turret. The guns were then depressed to a fixed angle so as
to bring the loading gear, which was protected below the gun
deck, in line with the bore; the charge was first rammed home
and then the projectile. With this arrangement, and in order to
keep the turret of manageable dimensions, the guns had to be
made short. Thus the 12·5-in. 38-ton M.L. gun had a length of
bore of but 16 calibres, and the largest English service gun of
16-in. diameter had a bore of 18 calibres in length; while the
largest of the type weighing 100 tons, built by Sir W. G. Armstrong
& Co., for the Italian navy, had a bore of 17·72 in. and
a length of 20 calibres. The rate of fire was fairly rapid—two
rounds could be fired from one turret with the 12·5-in.
guns in about three minutes, while it took about four minutes
to fire the same number from the 80-ton and 100-ton gun
turrets.

The possibility of double loading M.L. guns was responsible
for the bursting on the 2nd January 1879 of a 38-ton gun in a
turret on H.M.S. “Thunderer”; and it was partly due to this
accident that B.L. guns were subsequently more favourably
regarded in England, as it was argued that the double loading of
a B.L. gun was an impossibility.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 45.png|width=661}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 45.—Breech Mechanism for 6-inch B.L. Gun«/CTR»

With the B.L. system guns gradually grew to be about 30
calibres in length of bore, and they were not made longer because
this was considered a disadvantage, not to be compensated for
by the small additional velocity which the old black and brown
prismatic powders were capable of imparting with guns of
greater length. Increase in the striking energy of the projectile
was consequently sought by increasing the weight of the projectile,
and, to carry this out with advantage, a gun of larger
calibre had to be adopted. Thus the 12-in. B.L. gun of about
25 calibres in length gave place to the 13·5-in. gun of 30 calibres
and weighing 67 tons, and to the 16·25-in. also of 30 calibres and
weighing 111 tons. The 10,000- or 12,000-ton battleships
carrying these enormous pieces were, judged by our present-day
standard, far too small to carry such a heavy armament with their
ponderous armoured machinery, which restricted the coal supply
and rendered other advantages impossible; even the 24,000-ton
battleships are none too large to carry the number of heavy guns
now required to form the main armament.

The weight and size of the old brown prismatic charges had also reached huge dimensions; thus, while with heavy M.L. guns the weight of the full charge was about one-fourth that of the projectile, it had with heavy B.L. guns become one-half of the weight of the shell or even a greater proportion. The introduction of smokeless powder about 1890, having more than three times the amount of energy for the same weight of the older powders, allowed longer guns to be used, which fired a much smaller weight of charge but gave higher velocities; the muzzle or striking energy demanded for piercing hard-faced armour could consequently be obtained from guns of more moderate calibre. The 13·5-in. and 16·25-in. guns were therefore gradually discarded and new ships were armed with 12-in. guns of greater power. As the ballistic requirements are increased the weight of the charge becomes proportionately greater; thus for thePAGE:236present high velocity guns it has reached a ratio of about 0·4
of the weight of the projectile.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 46.png|width=700}}

«BR»
«FS[92%]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 46.«/FS»«/CTR»
«DHR[75%]»
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 47-48.png|width=390}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 47.—French Obturator. «SC»Fig«/SC». 48.—Elswick Cup.</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 49-51.png|width=400}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 49. «SC»Fig«/SC». 50. «SC»Fig«/SC». 51.«BR» «SC»Figs«/SC». 49-51.—Broadwell Ring.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
The progress of artillery and the improvements made in armour
have been reciprocal; as the protective value of iron and
subsequently of steel plates has increased, so the penetrative
force or quality of the projectile has advanced. Often, after a
period of apparent inactivity, fresh ideas or new metallurgical
processes have enabled further progress to be made; this is
the case at the present time as regards both projectiles
and armour. As a matter of fact, armour, at the present-day
fighting ranges, is
rather ahead of
artillery—hence
the demand for
greater power; but
even with this the
probability of perforation
is small,
and is usually only
obtained when the
projectile strikes
normally to the
surface of the plate;
the chance of this
happening in action
is somewhat remote.
During the
Russo-Japanese
War no instance of
perforation of the
thick belt or turret
armour is known;
the chief cause of
the Russian losses
was the bursting of
12-in. and 6-in. shells
inside the unarmoured
portions
of their ships; it
is stated that no
ship survived after
being struck by ten
12-in. projectiles.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><tr><td colspan="2">{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 52-53.png|width=390}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 52.—De Range Obturator.«BR»«BR»</td><td style="padding-left:1em">«SC»Fig«/SC». 53.—Steep Cone de«BR»Bange Obturator.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
Some authorities
have lately sought
to increase the
muzzle energy—without
adding
weight or length
to the gun—by increasing
the weight
of the projectile. This can be done to a limited extent with
beneficial results, but it is impossible to carry the idea very far,
as the projectile becomes very long and difficulties may be
encountered with the rifling; or, if these are avoided, the
thickness of the walls of the shell is increased so much that
the heavier projectiles is in reality less powerful owing to its internal
bursting charge being comparatively small. Again, many
foreign gunmakers claim that their guns are, in comparison
with English guns of the same power, of less weight. This is
true in a limited sense, but such guns have nothing like the same
factor of resistance as English guns, or, in other words, the EnglishPAGE:237guns are much stronger. This is an obvious advantage, but an
equally solid one is the fact that owing to the greater weight of
the home-made weapon the recoil energy is less and consequently
the mounting can be made of a lighter pattern. Besides, the
weight of the gun is so disposed as to bring its centre of gravity
as near the breech end as possible; by this means the radius
of the gun house is reduced to the smallest dimension and, in
consequence, there is a great saving of weight of armour. The
extra weight of the gun is therefore
more than compensated for.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;font-size:92%"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 54.png|width=583}}

«BR» «SPAN[style:position: relative; bottom:2em]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 54.—Metallic Cartridge Case.«/SPAN»</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» II.—«I»Names and Weights of English Cannon«/I», «I»1574«/I»</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Names.</td><td>Weight.</td><td>Diameter<br>of Bore.</td><td>Diameter<br>of Shot.</td><td>Weight of<br>Shot.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.<br>Serpentine.</td><td>Scores of<br>Paces at<br>point-blank.</td></tr><tr><td>lb</td><td>in.</td><td>in.</td><td>lb</td><td>lb</td><td></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Robinet</td><td> 200</td><td>1¼</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td> ½</td><td>. .</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Falconet</td><td> 500</td><td>2 </td><td>1¾</td><td>2</td><td> 1¼</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Falcon</td><td> 800</td><td>2¾</td><td>2½</td><td> 2½</td><td> 2½</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Minion</td><td>1100</td><td>3¼</td><td>3</td><td> 4½</td><td> 4½</td><td>17</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Sacre</td><td>1500</td><td>3½</td><td>3½</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>18</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Demi-Culverin  </td><td>2500</td><td>4¼</td><td>4</td><td>9</td><td>9</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Culverin</td><td>4000</td><td>5¼</td><td>5</td><td>18</td><td>18</td><td>25</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Demi-Cannon</td><td>6000</td><td>6½</td><td>6¼</td><td>30</td><td>28</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Cannon</td><td>7000</td><td>7¾</td><td>7½</td><td>60</td><td>40</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Eliza-Cannon</td><td>8000</td><td>8 </td><td>7¾</td><td>63</td><td>42</td><td>20</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Basiliske</td><td>9000</td><td>8¾</td><td>8½</td><td>60</td><td>60</td><td>21</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» III.</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Gun.</td><td>Weight of <br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of <br>Shot.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>f.s.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">27-pr.  66 cwt.</td><td>13·125</td><td>27 </td><td>1517</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">13½ pr. 37·5 cwt.  </td><td> 6·562</td><td>13·5</td><td>1618</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">6¾ pr.  20 cwt.</td><td> 4·922</td><td> 6·75</td><td>1696</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">3⅜ pr.  11 cwt.</td><td> 2·469</td><td>3·375</td><td>1720</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» IV.—«I»British Smooth Bore Guns«/I», «I»1860«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td colspan="2">Official Designation of Gun.</td><td>Calibre. </td><td>Weight of <br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of <br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft. Secs.</td><td>Ft. Tons.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6" style="border-right:1px solid transparent;vertical-align:middle">Cast<br>Iron.«BRACE2[6|l]»</td><td>10 in. 87 cwt.</td><td>10</td><td> 4·35</td><td>12</td><td>88·31</td><td>1292</td><td>1022</td></tr><tr><td>68 pr. 95 „</td><td>8·12 </td><td> 4·75</td><td>16</td><td>66·25</td><td>1579</td><td>1145</td></tr><tr><td> 8 in. 65 „</td><td>8·05 </td><td> 3·22</td><td>10</td><td> 49·875</td><td>1464</td><td>742</td></tr><tr><td>32 pr. 58 „</td><td>6·375</td><td>2·9</td><td>10</td><td> 31·375</td><td>1690</td><td>621</td></tr><tr><td>24  „ 50 „</td><td>5·823</td><td>2·5</td><td> 8</td><td>23·5 </td><td>1720</td><td>482</td></tr><tr><td>18  „ 38 „</td><td>5·292</td><td>1·9</td><td> 6</td><td>17·69</td><td>1690</td><td>350</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3" style="border-right:1px solid transparent;vertical-align:middle">Bro-<br>nze.«BRACE2[3|l]»</td><td>12  „ 18 „</td><td>4·623</td><td>0·9</td><td> 4</td><td>12·66</td><td>1769</td><td>275</td></tr><tr><td> 9  „ 13 „</td><td>4·20 </td><td> 0·65</td><td>2·5</td><td> 9·36</td><td>1614</td><td>169</td></tr><tr><td> 6  „  6 „</td><td>3·668</td><td>0·3</td><td>1·5</td><td> 6·23</td><td>1484</td><td> 95</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» V.—«I»British B.L. Ordnance«/I», «I»1860. Armstrong System.«/I»</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft. Secs.</td><td>Ft. Tons.</td></tr><tr><td>100 pr.</td><td>7 </td><td>«BRACE2[2|l]»4·1<br>3·6«BRACE2[2|r]»  *</td><td>12 </td><td>103·75</td><td>1166</td><td>978</td></tr><tr><td> 40 „</td><td> 4·75</td><td>«BRACE2[2|l]»1·75<br>1·6 «BRACE2[2|r]» * </td><td>5</td><td>41·5</td><td>«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»1164<br>1134 </td><td>390<br>370</td></tr><tr><td> 20 „</td><td> 3·75</td><td>«BRACE2[2|l]»0·8 <br>0·65«BRACE2[2|r]» * </td><td>2·5</td><td> 21·22</td><td>«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»1114<br> 997 </td><td>162<br>146</td></tr><tr><td> 12 „</td><td>3·0</td><td>0·425</td><td></td><td> 11·56</td><td>1184</td><td>112</td></tr><tr><td> 9 „</td><td>3·0</td><td>0·3</td><td> 1·125</td><td>9·0 </td><td>1141</td><td> 81</td></tr><tr><td> 6 „</td><td>2·5</td><td>0·175</td><td>0·75</td><td>6·0 </td><td> 946</td><td> 37</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»At a later date the velocities of these guns were altered.   * Two patterns were in existence.«/CTR»

Until late into the 16th century
the calibres of the guns were not
regulated with a view to the interchangeability
of shot. In the following
century ordnance was divided into
classes, but even then, owing no doubt
to manufacturing difficulties, there
was no fixed size for the bore. The
Tables II.-VII. give some idea of the
size and weight of these pieces.

Table II. is taken from Cleveland’s
«I»Notes«/I», but corrected from “An Old
Table of Ordnance” («I»Proc. R.A.I.«/I», vol.
xxviii. p. 365); the last column gives
the range in scores of paces at point-blank,
a term used in those days to denote the first part of the
trajectory which was supposed to be a straight line. Later the
point-blank range was that distance
from the gun on its carriage to the
first graze of the shot on the horizontal
plane when the axis of the gun was
placed horizontal; this depended on the
height of the gun above the ground
plane, but it was the only method of
determining the relative power of these
early guns.

In power, smooth-bore guns in Europe
did not differ very much from each other,
and it may be taken for granted that the
progress made since has been much the
same in all.

D’Antoni, in his «I»Treatise of Fire Arms«/I»
(translated by Captain Thomson, R.A.),
gives particulars of Italian guns of about
1746, which are shown in Table III.

It will be seen that the velocities
given in Table III. are not inferior to
those obtained from guns actually in
use in 1860 (see Table IV.). They were
considerably higher than those for
elongated rifled projectiles (Table V.)
for many years after their introduction;
the last-named, however, during flight
only lost their velocity slowly, while the
spherical shot lost their velocity so rapidly
that at 2000 yds. range only about one-third
of the initial velocity was retained.PAGE:238«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="text-align:center;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» VI. — «I»British Rifled Ordnance«/I», «I»1890«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation <br>of Gun.</td><td>{|Calibre.</td><td>Weight of <br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of <br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of <br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>Firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>M.L. Guns—</td><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb</td><td>lb</td><td>Ft. Secs.</td><td>Ft. Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 17·72 in.</td><td>17·72</td><td>100 </td><td>450 </td><td>2000 </td><td>1548</td><td>33,233 </td><td>24·5</td><td>⅙</td><td>Prism Black</td></tr><tr><td> 16  ,, </td><td>16</td><td>80</td><td>450 </td><td>1700 </td><td>1540</td><td>29,806 </td><td>25·0</td><td>¼</td><td>Prism Brown </td></tr><tr><td>12·5 ,,</td><td>  12·5</td><td>38</td><td>210 </td><td>818</td><td>1575</td><td>14,140 </td><td>19·2</td><td>⅓</td><td>Prism Black</td></tr><tr><td>12  ,,</td><td>12</td><td>35</td><td>140 </td><td>714</td><td>1390</td><td>9,563</td><td>15·2</td><td>⅓</td><td>P²</td></tr><tr><td>11  ,,</td><td>11</td><td>25</td><td>85</td><td>548</td><td>1360</td><td>6,510</td><td>13·5</td><td>⅓</td><td>Pebble</td></tr><tr><td>10  ,,</td><td>10</td><td>18</td><td>70</td><td>410</td><td>1379</td><td>5,406</td><td>12·5</td><td>⅓</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 9  ,,</td><td> 9</td><td>12</td><td>50</td><td>256</td><td>1440</td><td>3,695</td><td>11·0</td><td>½</td><td>,,,</td></tr><tr><td> 8  ,,</td><td> 8</td><td> 9</td><td>35</td><td>179</td><td>1390</td><td>2,391</td><td> 9·2</td><td>½</td><td>,,,</td></tr><tr><td> 7  ,,</td><td> 7</td><td> 7</td><td>30</td><td>114·6</td><td>1525</td><td>1,854</td><td> 9·2</td><td>1 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>64-pr.*</td><td>6·3</td><td>3·2</td><td>10</td><td>66·9</td><td>1390</td><td>897</td><td> 6·4</td><td>1 </td><td>R.L.G.⁴</td></tr><tr><td>B.L. Guns—</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 16·25 in.</td><td> 16·25</td><td>110·5</td><td>960 </td><td>1800 </td><td>2087</td><td>54,390 </td><td>38 </td><td>⅓</td><td>S.B.C.</td></tr><tr><td>13·5  ,,</td><td>13·5</td><td>67</td><td>630 </td><td>1250 </td><td>2016</td><td>35,230 </td><td>33 </td><td>½</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>12 ,,</td><td>12</td><td>45</td><td>295 </td><td>714</td><td>1914</td><td>18,137 </td><td>24·5</td><td>1 </td><td>Prism Brown</td></tr><tr><td>10 ,,</td><td>10</td><td>29</td><td>252 </td><td>500</td><td>2100</td><td>15,290 </td><td>25·8</td><td>1 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 9·2 ,,</td><td>9·2</td><td>22</td><td>166 </td><td>380</td><td>2036</td><td>10,915 </td><td>22·3</td><td>1½</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>8 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>14</td><td>118 </td><td>210</td><td>2200</td><td>7,046</td><td>20·0</td><td>2 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6 ,,</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>48</td><td>100</td><td>1960</td><td>2,435</td><td>13·5</td><td>3 </td><td>E.X.E.</td></tr><tr><td>5 ,,</td><td>5</td><td>2</td><td>16</td><td>50</td><td>1800</td><td>1,123</td><td> 9·2</td><td>3 </td><td>S.P.</td></tr><tr><td>4 ,,</td><td>4</td><td>1·3</td><td>12</td><td>25</td><td>1900</td><td>  626</td><td> 7·8</td><td>3 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>Q.F. Guns—</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4·7 in.</td><td>4·72</td><td>2·1</td><td>12</td><td>45</td><td>1786</td><td>  995</td><td> 8·8</td><td>8 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6-pr.</td><td>2·24</td><td>0·4</td><td>1·94</td><td> 6</td><td>1837</td><td>141·2</td><td> 5·3</td><td>20 </td><td>Q. F.</td></tr><tr><td>3 ,, </td><td>1·85</td><td>  0·25</td><td> 1·5</td><td>3·3</td><td>1873</td><td>80·2</td><td> 4·0</td><td>20 </td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR» * And many smaller guns.«/CTR»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="text-align:center;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» VII.—«I»British B.L. Ordnance«/I», «I»1900«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation <br>of Gun.</td><td style="padding-left:1em;padding-right:1em">Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>Firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb</td><td>Ft. Secs.</td><td>Ft. Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>16·25 in.</td><td> 16·25</td><td>110·5</td><td>960 </td><td>1800 </td><td>2087</td><td>54,390 </td><td>38 </td><td>1 </td><td>S.B.C.</td></tr><tr><td>13·5  in.</td><td>13·5</td><td>67</td><td>187 </td><td>1250 </td><td>2016</td><td>35,230 </td><td>33 </td><td>½</td><td>Cordite</td></tr><tr><td>12 in. Mark VIII.</td><td>12</td><td>46</td><td> 167·5</td><td>850</td><td>2367</td><td>33,000 </td><td>36·9</td><td>1 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>10 in.</td><td>10</td><td>29</td><td>76</td><td>500</td><td>2040</td><td>14,391 </td><td>24·8</td><td>1½</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>9·2 in. Mark X.</td><td>  9·2</td><td>28</td><td>103 </td><td>380</td><td>2601</td><td>17,826 </td><td>32·3</td><td>2½</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>8 in.</td><td></td><td>14</td><td> 32·625</td><td>210</td><td>2200</td><td>7,046</td><td>20·0</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6 in. Mark VII.</td><td>6</td><td> 7</td><td>20 </td><td>100</td><td>2493</td><td>4,335</td><td> 19·25</td><td>7</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>5 in.</td><td>5</td><td> 2</td><td>4·45</td><td> 50</td><td>1750</td><td>1,062</td><td> 8·8</td><td>3</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>4 in.</td><td>4</td><td>13</td><td>3·06</td><td> 25</td><td>1900</td><td>  626</td><td> 7·8</td><td>3</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1em">Q.F. Guns—</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6 in.</td><td>6</td><td>7</td><td>13·25</td><td>100</td><td>2200</td><td>3,356</td><td>160</td><td>6</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>4·7 ,,</td><td>4·72</td><td>2·1</td><td>5·43</td><td> 45</td><td>2188</td><td>1,494</td><td>12·0</td><td>8</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>4 ,,</td><td>4</td><td>1·3</td><td>3·75</td><td> 25</td><td>2456</td><td>1,046</td><td>11·6</td><td>9</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>12-pr.</td><td>3</td><td>0·6</td><td>1·94</td><td>12·5</td><td>2210</td><td>423</td><td> 8·0</td><td>15 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6 ,,</td><td>2·24</td><td>0·4</td><td> 0·483</td><td>6</td><td>1818</td><td>137</td><td> 4·8</td><td>20 </td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>3 ,,</td><td>1·81</td><td> 0·25</td><td> 0·396</td><td>3·3</td><td>1873</td><td>80·2</td><td> 4·0</td><td>20 </td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

As regards rapidity of aimed fire—and no shooting is worth consideration
which is not aimed—much depends on the quickness
with which the gun can be opened, loaded and closed again ready
for firing, but quite as much depends on the ease and convenience
of moving to any required direction the gun with its mounting;
also on the system of recoil adopted and the method of sighting.
Two identically similar guns may consequently give entirely
different rates of firing, unless mounted and sighted on the same
system—without taking into consideration the personal element of
the gun detachment or crew. The rates of firing shown in many
tables are therefore not always a trustworthy criterion of the guns
capabilities. The advantage of the Q.F. system («I»i.e.«/I» a gun firing
charges contained in metallic cases), when suitably mounted, over
the old B.L. guns was exhibited in a very marked manner in 1887,
when the first 4·7-in. Q.F. gun fired ten rounds in 47·5 seconds
and subsequently fifteen rounds in one minute. The 5-in. B.L. gun
when fired as rapidly as possible only fired ten rounds in 6 minutes
16 seconds; so that the Q.F. gun fired its tenth round before the
then service gun fired its second shot. Recent improvements made
in the mechanism of the B.L. gun enable it to compete with the
Q.F. system.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="text-align:center;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» VIII.—«I»British Ordnance«/I», «I»1910«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation <br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>Firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft. Secs.</td><td>Ft. Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1em">12 in. Mark XI.</td><td>12 </td><td>66 </td><td>..</td><td>850</td><td>2959</td><td>51,580</td><td>51·5</td><td>2</td><td>M.D.Cordite </td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1em">12 in. Mark X.</td><td>12 </td><td>58 </td><td>309</td><td>850</td><td>2900</td><td>47,697</td><td>51·0</td><td>2</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1em">10 in.</td><td>10 </td><td>31 </td><td>148</td><td>500</td><td>2800</td><td>27,205</td><td>39·5</td><td>2</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1.5em">9·2 Mark X.</td><td>  9·2</td><td>28 </td><td>103</td><td>380</td><td>2640</td><td>18,400</td><td>33·3</td><td>3</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1.5em">7·5 in.</td><td>  7·5</td><td>16 </td><td> 69·5</td><td>200</td><td>2800</td><td>10,883</td><td>29·0</td><td>4</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1.5em">6 in. Mark VII.</td><td>6</td><td>  7·4</td><td>20</td><td>100</td><td>2493</td><td> 4,308</td><td>19·6</td><td>6</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left;padding-left:1.5em">4 in.</td><td>4</td><td>  1·3</td><td>3·75</td><td> 25</td><td>2456</td><td> 1,046</td><td>11·6</td><td>9</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»Q.F. guns as in 1900.«/CTR»

The tabulated armour-piercing value of a gun is based on thePAGE:239results given by various formulas. These often vary considerably,
so in order that a direct comparison in the tables may be made,
this value is obtained for wrought iron plate only, using Tresidder’s
formula, which is one of the most trustworthy. The equivalent
thickness of Krupp cemented steel armour can be obtained
immediately by dividing the tabulated value for wrought iron by a
“factor of effect” of 2·3 to 2·4 for uncapped armour piercing
shot, and about 2·0 for capped armour piercing shell. These
factors are dependent on the nature of the projectile and must
therefore be taken as approximate.

Tables VIII.-XXII. are obtained from trustworthy sources,
but as great secrecy is now observed in many countries there may
be a few inaccuracies; in some cases the whole of the data are not
available.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» IX. — «I»French Naval Ordnance«/I», «I»1910«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>305 mm.</td><td>12·01</td><td>..</td><td>..</td><td>750 </td><td>2870</td><td>42,890 </td><td>46·0</td><td>  1·5</td><td rowspan="2">Smokeless<br>B. Powder</td></tr><tr><td>274 ,,</td><td>10·8 </td><td>34·5</td><td>..</td><td>562 </td><td>2650</td><td>27,186 </td><td>38·8</td><td>  1·5</td></tr><tr><td>240 ,,</td><td>9·45</td><td>23·6</td><td>..</td><td>375 </td><td>2870</td><td>21,445 </td><td>37·0</td><td>2</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>194 ,,</td><td>7·64</td><td>12·5</td><td>..</td><td>190 </td><td>2870</td><td>10,890 </td><td>29·0</td><td>2</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>164·7 ,,</td><td>6·46</td><td>8·5</td><td>..</td><td>115 </td><td>3000</td><td>7,185</td><td>26·3</td><td>4</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>Q .F. Guns—</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>164·7 mm.</td><td>6·46</td><td>8·1</td><td>..</td><td>115 </td><td>2870</td><td>6,568</td><td>24·5</td><td>5</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>140 ,,</td><td> 5·44</td><td> 4·13</td><td>..</td><td>66</td><td>2625</td><td>3,153</td><td>20·0</td><td>6</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>100 ,,</td><td>3·94</td><td>..</td><td>..</td><td>31</td><td>2395</td><td>1,232</td><td>12·4</td><td>6</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 75 ,,</td><td>2·9 </td><td>..</td><td>..</td><td>14</td><td>3116</td><td>  943</td><td>14·5</td><td>12</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 65 ,,</td><td>2·57</td><td>..</td><td>..</td><td>  8·8</td><td>2871</td><td>  503</td><td>10·8</td><td>12</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 47 ,,</td><td>1·85</td><td>..</td><td>..</td><td>  3·3</td><td>2871</td><td>  188</td><td> 7·9</td><td>15</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» X.—«I»German Naval Ordnance«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>Q.F. Guns—</td><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td rowspan="3">Nitro-<br>Glycerine<br>powder</td></tr><tr><td>28 cm.</td><td>11·02</td><td>33·3</td><td>..</td><td>529</td><td>2854</td><td>29,878</td><td>40·2</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>24 ,,</td><td>9·45</td><td>25·4</td><td>88·2</td><td>309</td><td>2740</td><td>16,086</td><td>31·0</td><td> 1½</td></tr><tr><td>21 ,,</td><td>8·2</td><td>15·75</td><td>49·5</td><td>242</td><td>2526</td><td>10,707</td><td>26·1</td><td>3</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>17 ,,</td><td>6·7</td><td>7·8</td><td>43·1</td><td>132</td><td>2887</td><td>7,629</td><td>26·1</td><td>5</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>15 ,,</td><td>5·9</td><td>4·73</td><td>19·83</td><td>88</td><td>2461</td><td>3,696</td><td>18·0</td><td>7</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 10·5 ,,</td><td>4·13</td><td>1·645</td><td>7·27</td><td>38·35</td><td>2297</td><td>1,403</td><td> 12·75</td><td>8</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 8·8 ,,</td><td>3·42</td><td>1·34</td><td>4·85</td><td>23·6</td><td>2789</td><td>1,273</td><td>14·7</td><td>10</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 5  ,,</td><td>1·97</td><td>0·236</td><td>0·66</td><td>3·86</td><td>2165</td><td> 125</td><td>5·4</td><td>11</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»«I»Note«/I». — It is stated that the new German 28 cm. 50 calibre naval gun weighing 43·9 tons fires, with a charge of 291 lb, a projectile of 760 lb with a velocity of 2871 f.s.«/CTR»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XI.—«I»Italian Naval Ordnance«/I», «I»1910«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 343 mm.</td><td>13·5</td><td>67·9</td><td>187·2</td><td>1215</td><td>2067</td><td>36,050</td><td>34·0</td><td>..</td><td>Strip<br>Ballistite</td></tr><tr><td>305 ,,</td><td>12</td><td>51</td><td>231·5</td><td>850</td><td>2580</td><td>39,220</td><td>42·0</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>254 ,,</td><td>10</td><td>30</td><td>85</td><td>450</td><td>2461</td><td>19,000</td><td>31·0</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>203 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>19</td><td>57</td><td>250</td><td>2526</td><td>11,060</td><td>27·0</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>152 ,,</td><td>6</td><td>5·7</td><td>17·6</td><td>100</td><td>2296</td><td>3,655</td><td>17·0</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>120 ,,</td><td>4·72</td><td>2·1</td><td> 5·5</td><td>45</td><td>2116</td><td>1,397</td><td>11·4</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 76 ,,</td><td>3·0</td><td>0·6</td><td> 2·17</td><td>12·5</td><td>2296</td><td>457</td><td> 8·5</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 57 ,,</td><td>2·24</td><td>0·4</td><td> 1·05</td><td>6</td><td>2198</td><td>201</td><td> 6·3</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 47 ,,</td><td>1·81</td><td>0·25</td><td> 0·67</td><td>3·3</td><td>2330</td><td>124</td><td> 5·8</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XII.—«I»Russian Naval Ordnance«/I», 1910.</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td rowspan="2">«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»Nitro-<br>Cellulose </td></tr><tr><td>12 in.</td><td>12</td><td>59</td><td>..</td><td>720</td><td>2600</td><td>33,730</td><td>39·0</td><td>..</td></tr><tr><td>10  ,, </td><td>10</td><td>32</td><td>..</td><td>488</td><td>2550</td><td>22,003</td><td>34·0</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>8 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>14</td><td>87</td><td>188</td><td>2950</td><td>11,345</td><td>29·5</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6 ,,</td><td>6</td><td>6·28</td><td>50·6</td><td>91·5</td><td>2118</td><td>2,849</td><td>14·4</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>9 pr.</td><td> 4·2</td><td>0·87</td><td>4·88</td><td>27·75</td><td>1226</td><td> 289</td><td> 4·2</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>4 ,,</td><td> 3·43</td><td>0·45</td><td>3·1</td><td>15·0</td><td>1451</td><td> 219</td><td> 4·6</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>Q.F. Guns—</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 6 in.</td><td>6</td><td>5·75</td><td>28</td><td>91·5</td><td>2502</td><td>3,970</td><td>18·5</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 4·7 ,,</td><td> 4·72</td><td>2·95</td><td>15·4</td><td> 45·0</td><td>2502</td><td>1,953</td><td>14·6</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 2·9 ,,</td><td>..</td><td>0·87</td><td> 3·53</td><td>10·8</td><td>2700</td><td>  546</td><td>10·3</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 1·81 ,,</td><td> 1·81</td><td>0·323</td><td>..</td><td> 3·3</td><td>2003</td><td>91·8</td><td> 4·6</td><td>..</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»PAGE:240«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XIII. — Austrian Naval Ordnance, 1910.</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30·5 cm.</td><td>12·01</td><td>. .</td><td>. .</td><td>990</td><td>2625</td><td>47,300</td><td>46·0</td><td>. .</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>24 ,,</td><td>9·45</td><td>21·5</td><td>120·6</td><td>474</td><td>2595</td><td>22,121</td><td>34·5</td><td>.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>19 ,,</td><td>7·5</td><td>11·6</td><td>56</td><td>198</td><td>2700</td><td>10,025</td><td>27·3</td><td> 3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15 ,,</td><td>5·91</td><td>5·2</td><td>28·8</td><td>112·5</td><td>2608</td><td> 5,308</td><td>22·0</td><td>10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12 ,,</td><td>4·72</td><td>2·0</td><td>9·7</td><td>52·4</td><td>2264</td><td> 3,554</td><td>13·7</td><td>10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7  ,,</td><td>2·7</td><td>. .</td><td>3·3</td><td>15·2</td><td>2378</td><td>. .</td><td>10·4</td><td>. .</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4·7 ,,</td><td> 1·85</td><td> 0·253</td><td> 0·79</td><td> 3·3</td><td>2329</td><td>. .</td><td> 5·8</td><td>. .</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3·7 ,,</td><td>1·4</td><td>. .</td><td>. .</td><td></td><td>2346</td><td>. .</td><td>. .</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XIV.—«I»Austrian Coast Artillery«/I», 1910.</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30·5 cm.</td><td>12·01 </td><td>. .</td><td>198·4</td><td>981</td><td>2297</td><td>35,860</td><td>37·8</td><td>. .</td><td>Tubular</td></tr><tr><td>28 ,, </td><td>11·024</td><td>38 </td><td>220 </td><td>760</td><td>1722</td><td>15,615</td><td>22·5</td><td>. .</td><td>Prism</td></tr><tr><td>15 ,, </td><td> 5·906</td><td> 4·28</td><td>18·28</td><td>100</td><td>2297</td><td> 3,659</td><td>17·2</td><td>4</td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XV.—«I»United States Naval Guns«/I», 1910.</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td rowspan="2">«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»Nitro-<br>Cellulose </td></tr><tr><td>13 in.</td><td>13</td><td>61·4</td><td>180</td><td>1130 </td><td>2000</td><td>31,333</td><td>31·8</td><td>. .</td></tr><tr><td>12  ,, </td><td>12</td><td>56·1</td><td>340</td><td>870</td><td>2950</td><td>52,483</td><td>52</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>10  ,, </td><td>10</td><td>34·6</td><td>207·5</td><td>510</td><td>2700</td><td>25,772</td><td>38</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>8 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>18·7</td><td>98·5</td><td>260</td><td>2750</td><td>13,630</td><td>31·1</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>7 ,,</td><td>7</td><td>12·7</td><td>58</td><td>165</td><td>2700</td><td>8,34 0</td><td>25·9</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6 ,,</td><td>6</td><td> 8·6</td><td>37</td><td>105</td><td>2800</td><td>8,710</td><td>23·5</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>5 ,,</td><td>5</td><td>5</td><td>23·8</td><td> 50</td><td>3150</td><td>3,439</td><td>21·1</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 4·7 ,,</td><td> 4·72</td><td>. .</td><td>. .</td><td> 45</td><td>2600</td><td>2,110</td><td>15·5</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>4 ,,</td><td>4</td><td>2·9</td><td>12·3</td><td> 33</td><td>2800</td><td>1,794</td><td>16·1</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>3 ,,</td><td>3</td><td>1·0</td><td> 3·85</td><td> 13</td><td>2700</td><td> 657</td><td>11·0</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6 pr.</td><td> 2·24</td><td>. .</td><td>. .</td><td>6</td><td>2240</td><td> 209</td><td> 6·6</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>3 ,,</td><td> 1·81</td><td>. .</td><td>. .</td><td>3</td><td>2200</td><td> 100</td><td> 5·4</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XVI.—«I»United States Coast Defence Guns«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td rowspan="2">«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»Nitro-<br>Cellulose </td></tr><tr><td>16 in.</td><td>16</td><td>127 </td><td>612</td><td>2400</td><td>2150</td><td>77,000</td><td>46·4</td><td>. .</td></tr><tr><td>14 ,,</td><td>14</td><td>50</td><td>280</td><td>1660</td><td>2150</td><td>53,220</td><td>41·0</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>12 ,,</td><td>12</td><td>59</td><td>340</td><td>1046</td><td>2250</td><td>36,730</td><td>37·6</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>10 ,,</td><td>10</td><td>34·3</td><td>205</td><td>604</td><td>2250</td><td>21,200</td><td>31·5</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 8 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>14·4</td><td>80</td><td>316</td><td>2200</td><td>10,600</td><td>24·5</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 6 ,,</td><td>6</td><td>9·45</td><td>35</td><td>106</td><td>2600</td><td>4,970</td><td>21·1</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 5 ,,</td><td>5</td><td>4·96</td><td>20</td><td> 58</td><td>2600</td><td>2·718</td><td>17·2</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 4·72 ,,</td><td> 4·72</td><td>2·75</td><td>10·5</td><td> 45</td><td>2600</td><td>2,110</td><td>15·5</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 4 ,,</td><td>4</td><td>1·61</td><td>7·5</td><td> 33</td><td>2300</td><td>1,210</td><td>12·0</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 3 ,,</td><td>3</td><td>1·2</td><td>6·0</td><td> 15</td><td>2600</td><td>704</td><td> 11·25</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td> 2·24 ,,</td><td> 2·24</td><td>0·38</td><td>1·35</td><td>6</td><td>2400</td><td>240</td><td> 7·3</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>12 ,, mortar</td><td>12</td><td>13</td><td>«BRACE2[2|l]»54<br>62 </td><td>1046<br> 824</td><td>1150<br>1325</td><td>9,590<br>10,025</td><td>. .<br>. .</td><td></td><td>. .<br>. .,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XVII. «I»Japanese Naval Ordnance«/I», 1910.</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td style="padding-left:0.5em;padding-right:0.5em">Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>  12·5</td><td>66 </td><td>. .</td><td>990 </td><td>2308</td><td>36,500 </td><td>37·3</td><td>0·2</td><td>MD. Cordite</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>59 </td><td>305</td><td>850 </td><td>2800</td><td>46,200 </td><td>47·2</td><td>2·0</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>34 </td><td>  166·5</td><td>500 </td><td>2850</td><td>28,170 </td><td>40·9</td><td>3·0</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td> 17·5</td><td>44</td><td>250 </td><td>2740</td><td>13,015 </td><td>30·3</td><td>2·0</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>7 </td><td>35</td><td>100 </td><td>2800</td><td>5,436</td><td>29·3</td><td>7·0</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>4·72</td><td>2·1</td><td>5·5</td><td>45</td><td>2188</td><td>1,494</td><td>12·0</td><td>8</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>0·6</td><td>1·94</td><td> 12·5</td><td>2210</td><td>423</td><td> 8·0</td><td>12</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>0·9</td><td>. .</td><td> 10·8</td><td>2716</td><td>553</td><td>10·2</td><td>. .</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>2·24</td><td>0·4</td><td>0·5</td><td>6·0</td><td>1818</td><td>138</td><td>4·8</td><td>20</td><td>,,</td></tr><tr><td>1·35</td><td>0·25</td><td>0·4</td><td>3·3</td><td>1873</td><td>80</td><td> 4·25</td><td>20</td><td>,,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
Note.—The Japanese fleet has mainly been armed by Armstrong’s Works, but the “Katori” was armed by Vickers’, and those
ships taken from the Russians during the late war are armed with guns from Krupp or Obuchoff. Guns of all sizes are now,
however, being constructed in Japan, so that the country is no longer dependent on foreign factories.PAGE:241«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XVIII.—«I»Sir W. G. Armstrong«/I», «I»Whitworth & Co.’s Guns. Abridged Table«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid;text-align:center"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate Of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr style="text-align:center"><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12 in.</td><td>12 </td><td>69</td><td>318</td><td>850</td><td>2960</td><td>51,640</td><td>51·5</td><td> 2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10 ,,</td><td>10 </td><td>36</td><td>200</td><td>500</td><td>3000</td><td>33,318</td><td>44·0</td><td> 3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 9·2 ,,</td><td> 9·2</td><td>28</td><td>138</td><td>380</td><td>3030</td><td>24,190</td><td>40·8</td><td> 4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 8 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>21</td><td>90</td><td>250</td><td>3000</td><td>15,600</td><td>34·9</td><td> 5</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 7·5 ,,</td><td> 7·5</td><td>15·75</td><td>76</td><td>200</td><td>3000</td><td>12,481</td><td>32·1</td><td> 6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 6 ,,</td><td>6</td><td>8·75</td><td> 35·5</td><td>100</td><td>3050</td><td> 6,492</td><td>26·0</td><td> 9</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 4·7 ,,</td><td> 4·7</td><td>3·3</td><td>15</td><td> 45</td><td>3000</td><td> 2,808</td><td>19·1</td><td>12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 4 ,,</td><td>4</td><td>2·1</td><td>11</td><td> 31</td><td>3000</td><td> 1,934</td><td>17·3</td><td>12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 3 ,,</td><td>3</td><td>1·1</td><td> 5·75</td><td>14·3</td><td>3050</td><td>922</td><td>13·9</td><td>30</td><td>«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»Semi- <br>automatic </td></tr><tr><td> 6 pr.</td><td> 2·24</td><td> ·52</td><td></td><td>1·13</td><td>2400</td><td>240</td><td> 7·3</td><td>25</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 3  ,,</td><td> 1·85</td><td> ·25</td><td>·625</td><td>3·3</td><td>2300</td><td>121</td><td> 5·7</td><td>25</td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»«FS[92%]»«I»Note.—The most powerful gun of each calibre has been selected«/I».«/FS»«/CTR»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>Table XIX.—«I»Vickers«/I», «I»Sons and Maxim’s Guns. Abridged Table«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid;text-align:center"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td style="padding-left:1.5em;padding-right:1.5em">Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate Of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr style="text-align:center"><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12 in.</td><td>12</td><td>66·85</td><td>344</td><td>850</td><td>3010</td><td>53,400</td><td>53·0</td><td> 2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10 ,,</td><td>10</td><td>27·85</td><td>172</td><td>496·6</td><td>2863</td><td>28,225</td><td>41·0</td><td> 3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 9·2 ,,</td><td>9·2</td><td>27·8 </td><td>184</td><td>380</td><td>3070</td><td>24,835</td><td>41·3</td><td> 4</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8 ,,</td><td>8</td><td>14·15</td><td>90</td><td>216·7</td><td>3090</td><td>14,350</td><td>33·9</td><td> 6</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 7·5 ,,</td><td>7·5</td><td>16·0</td><td>80·3</td><td>200</td><td>3007</td><td>12,540</td><td>32·3</td><td> 8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>6 ,,</td><td>6</td><td>7·8</td><td>43</td><td>100</td><td>3190</td><td> 7,056</td><td>27·9</td><td>10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 4·7 ,,</td><td>4·72</td><td>3·1</td><td>17</td><td>45·14</td><td>3050</td><td> 2,910</td><td>18·5</td><td>12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4 ,,</td><td>4</td><td>2·1</td><td>11·25</td><td>31</td><td>3030</td><td> 1,975</td><td>17·6</td><td>15</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>0·95</td><td>3·625</td><td> 12·5</td><td>2700</td><td>632</td><td>10·8</td><td>25</td><td>«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»Semi- <br>automatic </td></tr><tr><td>6 pr.</td><td>2·24</td><td>0·46</td><td>1·55</td><td> 6</td><td>2600</td><td>281</td><td> 8·2</td><td>28</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3 ,,</td><td>1·85</td><td>·28</td><td>1·066</td><td> 3·3</td><td>2800</td><td>179·4</td><td> 7·5</td><td>30</td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»«FS[92%]»Note.—«I»The most powerful gun of each calibre has been selected«/I».«/FS»«/CTR»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><caption>«SC»Table«/SC» XX.—«I»Krupp’s Naval and Coast-Defence Ordnance. Abridged from Table of Ordnance«/I», «I»1906«/I».</caption><tr style="border:1px solid;text-align:center"><td>Official Designation<br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr style="text-align:center"><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>30·5 cm.</td><td>12·01</td><td>47<br>52·2</td><td>357</td><td>771·6<br>981·0</td><td>3251<br>2884</td><td>56,540</td><td>..<br>53·0</td><td> 2–3</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>28 ,,</td><td>11·02</td><td>36·4<br>40·4</td><td>276</td><td>595·2<br>760·6</td><td>3255<br>2881</td><td>43,754</td><td>52·0<br>49·0</td><td> 2–3</td><td>The explosive<br>for the</td></tr><tr><td>24 ,,</td><td>9·45</td><td>22·93<br>25·45</td><td>173·6</td><td>374·8<br>474·0</td><td>3255<br>2894</td><td>27,540</td><td>44·5<br>42·0</td><td> 3–4</td><td>charges of<br>guns of 105<br>cm. and up-</td></tr><tr><td>21 ,,</td><td>8·27</td><td>15·20<br>16·90</td><td>115·2</td><td>249·1<br>308·6</td><td>3251<br>2920</td><td>18,101</td><td>38·6<br>36·5</td><td> 4–5</td><td>wards con-</td></tr><tr><td>19 ,,</td><td>7·48</td><td>11·37<br>12·64</td><td>86·2</td><td>187·4<br>235·9</td><td>3241<br>2890</td><td>13,572</td><td>35·0<br>33·1</td><td> 5–6</td><td>tains 25% of<br>nitroglycerin</td></tr><tr><td>17 ,,</td><td>6·7</td><td>8·55<br>9·48</td><td>64·6</td><td>141·1<br>176·4</td><td>3238<br>2897</td><td>10,259</td><td>32·0<br>30·3</td><td> 6–7</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>15·5 ,,</td><td>5·91</td><td>5·5<br>6·2</td><td>41·7</td><td> 90·4<br>112·4</td><td>3245<br>2910</td><td>6,603</td><td>27·4<br>26·1</td><td> 6–8</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12 ,,</td><td>4·72</td><td>2·86<br>3·18</td><td>21·72</td><td> 46·3<br> 59·5</td><td>3274<br>2887</td><td>3,442</td><td>22·2<br>20·8</td><td>15–20</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10·5 ,,</td><td>4·13</td><td>1·92<br>2·13</td><td>14·55</td><td> 30·9<br> 39·7</td><td>3281<br>2897</td><td>2,306</td><td>19·5<br>18·3</td><td>20–25</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">9   ,,</td><td rowspan="2">3·54</td><td>1·28</td><td>7·72</td><td> 19·84<br> 25·13</td><td>3162<br>2812</td><td>1,377</td><td>16·0<br>15·0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1·45</td><td>7·94</td><td> 19·84<br> 25·13</td><td>3248<br>2887</td><td>1,452</td><td>16·5<br>15·6</td><td>25–30</td><td>The explosive<br>for charges</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">7·5 ,,</td><td rowspan="2">2·95</td><td>·74</td><td>4·48</td><td> 11·46<br> 14·55</td><td>3165<br>2812</td><td>797</td><td>13·3<br>12·6</td><td></td><td>of guns up<br>to 9·5 cm.</td></tr><tr><td>·84</td><td>4·61</td><td> 11·46<br> 14·55</td><td>3251<br>2887</td><td>840</td><td>13·9<br>13·0</td><td>30–40</td><td>contains 40%<br>nitroglycerin</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">5·7 ,,</td><td rowspan="2">2·24</td><td>·325</td><td>1·96</td><td>5·07<br> 6·4</td><td>3156<br>2808</td><td>350</td><td>10·1<br> 9·5</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>·367</td><td>2·03</td><td>5·07<br> 6·4</td><td>3242<br>2884</td><td>369</td><td>10·5<br> 9·9</td><td>40–50</td><td></td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">5·0 ,,</td><td rowspan="2">1·97</td><td>·220</td><td>1·32</td><td>3·42<br> 4·3</td><td>3242<br>2890</td><td>249</td><td> 8·7<br> 8·4</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>·248</td><td>1·37</td><td>3·42<br> 4·3</td><td>3242<br>2890</td><td>249</td><td> 9·0<br> 8·75</td><td>40–50</td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«I»Note«/I». The above table includes a light and heavy type of gun, but for each the length of bore is 50 calibres; in the unabridged
table guns of 40 and 45 calibres are included. The particulars of the shorter pieces can be easily obtained from Table XX., as thePAGE:242construction of Krupp’s complete table is based on very simple rules. Thus, for the same relative length of gun, the weight of the
projectile and of the charge are, with few exceptions, in proportion to the cube of the calibre. Again, the weight of the gun varies as
the cube of the calibre multiplied by the length. The muzzle velocity is practically identical for guns of the same relative length,
and varies as the square root of the length; consequently the muzzle energy varies directly as the length. Two weights of projectile
are given for every gun, but the muzzle energy of each, for the same charge, is identical; this result is never the case in actual
practice. Similar arithmetical processes are utilized for the Schneider-Canet, Bofors and Skoda tables, and only the first named is
therefore given. 

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder"><caption>Table XXI.—«I»Schneider-Canet Guns. Abridged Table.«/I»</caption><tr style="border:1px solid;text-align:center"><td>Official Designation <br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>305 mm.</td><td>12·01</td><td>57·6</td><td>..</td><td>826</td><td>3116</td><td>55,717</td><td>54·8</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>274·4 ,,</td><td>10·9</td><td>41·9</td><td>..</td><td>606</td><td>3116</td><td>40,859</td><td>49·1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>240 ,,</td><td>9·45</td><td>28·0</td><td>..</td><td>407</td><td>3116</td><td>27,487</td><td>43·2</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>200 ,,</td><td>7·87</td><td>16·25</td><td>..</td><td>231</td><td>3116</td><td>15,601</td><td>35·9</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>175 ,,</td><td>6·89</td><td>10·8</td><td>..</td><td>165</td><td>3116</td><td>11,143</td><td>32·1</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>150 ,,</td><td>5·91</td><td> 6·8</td><td>..</td><td>99</td><td>3116</td><td> 6,686</td><td>27·0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>120 ,,</td><td>4·72</td><td> 3·5</td><td>..</td><td>48</td><td>3116</td><td> 3,268</td><td>21·0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>100 ,,</td><td>3·94</td><td> 2·0</td><td>..</td><td>28·6</td><td>3116</td><td> 1,931</td><td>17·8</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 75 ,,</td><td>2·95</td><td> 1·2</td><td>..</td><td>14·3</td><td>3116</td><td>917</td><td>14·6</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 57 ,,</td><td>2·24</td><td>·55</td><td>..</td><td> 6·0</td><td>3116</td><td>400</td><td>10·7</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 47 ,,</td><td>1·85</td><td>·30</td><td>..</td><td> 3·3</td><td>3116</td><td>223</td><td> 8·9</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»«I»Note«/I». — The unabridged table gives only 45 and 50 calibre guns; the above table gives the particulars for 50 calibre guns.«/CTR»

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder"><caption>Table XXII.—«I»Bethlehem Steel Co.’s Guns. Abridged Table.«/I»</caption><tr style="border:1px solid;text-align:center"><td>Official Designation <br>of Gun.</td><td>Calibre.</td><td>Weight of<br>Gun.</td><td>Weight of<br>Charge.</td><td>Weight of<br>Projectile.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Velocity.</td><td>Muzzle<br>Energy.</td><td>Perforation<br>of Wrought<br>Iron.</td><td>Rate of<br>firing<br>Rounds.</td><td>Propellant.</td></tr><tr><td>In.</td><td>Tons.</td><td>lb.</td><td>lb.</td><td>Ft.-Secs.</td><td>Ft.-Tons.</td><td>In.</td><td>Per Minute.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>18 in.</td><td>18</td><td>60</td><td>..</td><td>2000</td><td>2250</td><td>70,185</td><td>42·7</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12 ,,</td><td>12</td><td>53</td><td>..</td><td>850</td><td>2800</td><td>46,195</td><td>47·4</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10 ,,</td><td>10</td><td>35</td><td>..</td><td>500</td><td>2800</td><td>27,174</td><td>39·8</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 8</td><td> 8</td><td>18·6</td><td>..</td><td>250</td><td>2800</td><td>13,587</td><td>31·5</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 7 ,,</td><td> 7</td><td>14·5</td><td>..</td><td>165</td><td>2900</td><td>9,619</td><td>28·82</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 6 ,,</td><td> 6</td><td> 8·4</td><td>..</td><td>105</td><td>2900</td><td>6,180</td><td>24·9</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 5 ,,</td><td> 5</td><td> 4·75</td><td>..</td><td>60</td><td>2900</td><td>3,490</td><td>20·5</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 4·724 ,,</td><td> 4·724</td><td> 4·2</td><td>..</td><td>45</td><td>2900</td><td>2,623</td><td>18·3</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 4 ,,</td><td> 4</td><td> 2·6</td><td>..</td><td>33</td><td>2900</td><td>1,924</td><td>17·0</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 3 ,,</td><td> 3</td><td>·85</td><td>..</td><td>13</td><td>2800</td><td>707</td><td>11·7</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 2·24 ,,</td><td> 2·24</td><td>·43</td><td>..</td><td>6</td><td>2400</td><td>240</td><td> 7·3</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> 1·85 ,,</td><td> 1·85</td><td>·245</td><td>..</td><td>3</td><td>2600</td><td>142</td><td> 6·4</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»«I»Note«/I».—The most powerful gun of each calibre has been selected.«/CTR»

Modern naval artillery may be looked upon as the high water
mark of gun construction, and keeps pace with the latest
scientific improvements. For coast defence the latest pattern
of ordnance is not of the same importance; in general very
similar guns are employed, although perhaps of an older type.
Formerly in the British Service the heaviest guns have been
used for this purpose; but of late years, where fortifications
could be erected in suitable situations, the largest gun favoured
is the 9·2-in. of the latest model. Other governments have,
however, selected still heavier pieces up to 12-in. calibre, mounted
in heavily armoured cupolas or gunhouses.

As regards field material, mobility is still one of the primary
conditions, and, as high power is seldom required, ordnance of
medium calibre is all that is necessary. For siege purposes guns
of 4-in. to 6-in. calibre are generally sufficient, but howitzers up
to 28 cm. (11·02 in.) were used at the siege of Port Arthur,
1904. All authorities seem agreed that for ordinary field guns
75 mm. or 3-in. calibre is the smallest which can be efficiently
employed for the purpose, and the muzzle velocity is in nearly
all equipments about 500 m.s. (1640 f.s.).

For mountain equipments all foreign governments have selected
a 75-millimetre gun with a velocity of about 350 m.s. (1148 f.s.);
in England, however, a 2·75-in. has been supplied to mountain
batteries; this fires a projectile of with 1440 f.s.

Field Howitzer batteries abroad have pieces of from 10 to 12
centimetres calibre and a low velocity; in England a 5-in.
howitzer is at present used, but it is intended to adopt a
4·5-in. howitzer of 17 calibres in length for future manufacture.

Heavy shell power and long range fighting render the work of
the gun designer particularly difficult, especially when this is
combined with conditions restricting length and
weight; and, in addition, other considerations,
especially for naval guns, may have to be taken into
account such as the allowable weight of the armament, «SH»Theory of gun-making.«/SH» and the size of the gun house or turret. These and other similar
conditions are important factors in deciding on the type of design
which embodies most advantages for a heavy gun intended for
the main armament. For land defence more latitude is allowed
so long as this is combined with economy. With both heavy and
medium naval guns the length is often limited to 45 calibres on
account of peculiarities in the design of the vessel, but usually
great rapidity of fire, high velocity and large shell power are
insisted upon. Again for Q.F. field guns, where high velocity
is not of importance, ease of manipulation, rapidity of working
and reliability even after months of arduous service are essential.
Supposing, However, that the initial conditions, imposed by the
shipbuilder or by the exigency of the case, can be fulfilled, it
still remains to so design the gun that, when it is fired, there is
an ample margin of safety to meet the various stresses to which
the several portions of the structure are subject. The two
principal stresses requiring special attention are the circumferential
stress, which tends to burst open the gun longitudinally,
and the longitudinal stress. The calculation for the last named
is based on the supposition that the gun is a hollow cylinder, closed
at one end by the breech screw and at the other by the shot,
both being firmly fixed to the cylinder. The gas pressure exerts
its force on the face of the breech screw and on the base of the shot
thus tending to pull the walls of the cylinder asunder. But
besides these there is the special stress on the threads of the
breech screw which must receive very careful consideration.

Regard must also be had to the fact that in building up the
gun, the smaller the diameter of the hoop and the longer it is, the
higher must be the temperature to which it is heated before shrinking.
This is necessary in order that the dilatation may allow
sufficient clearance to place the hoop correctly in position on the
gun, without the possibility of its contracting and gripping before
being so placed. Should it warp while being heated or whilePAGE:243being placed in position the hoop may prematurely grip on the
gun and may consequently have to be sacrificed by cutting it off
and shrinking on another.

The dilatation must be so adjusted that the required temperature
to obtain it is not higher than that used for annealing
the forging, otherwise the effect of this annealing will be modified.
There is, therefore, for this reason, considerable risk in shrinking
up long hoops of small diameter.

Before heating hoops of large diameter two or three narrow
reference bands are turned on the exterior and their diameter
measured; special gauges are prepared to measure these plus
the dilatation required. After heating the hoop but before
shrinking it, the diameter of the reference bands when tested by
these gauges should not be in excess of them. The temperature
can then be easily ascertained by dividing the dilatation by the
coefficient of expansion of steel per degree F. or C., taking of
course the diameter into account.

For small hoops this method is not convenient, as the hoop
cools too quickly; the dilatation must then be obtained by
ascertaining the temperature, and this is best done by the use
of some form of pyrometer, such as a Siemens water pyrometer,
before the hoop is withdrawn from the furnace.

It may also be desired to obtain a given striking energy or
velocity at some definite range—then, the weight of the projectile
being decided upon, the muzzle velocity is found from
the formulas (see «LN:Ballistics|Ballistics«/LN») given in Exterior Ballistics. From
this and the length of the gun allowable the designer has, with
the aid of former experience and the formulas given in Internal
Ballistics, to decide on the weight and nature of the powder
charge necessary and the internal dimensions of the powder
chamber and bore. These data are used to plot what is termed
a “gunmakers’ curve,” «I»i.e.«/I» the curve of pressures along the bore
which the powder charge decided upon will give. The factor of
safety and the maximum allowable stress of the steel forgings
or steel wire also being known, the necessary strength of each
section of the gun can be easily found and it remains to so
proportion each part as to conform to these conditions and to
meet certain others, such as facilities for manufacture, which
experience only can determine.

When the second course consists of a single long tube into
which a tapered barrel is driven, as in the system adopted by the
English government, the two tubes are treated as a single tube
equal in thickness to the two together; but when the second
course consists of several tubes shrunk on to the barrel the additional
strength, obtained by the initial tension of the shrunk
tubes, is sometimes taken account of in the calculation, or the
two may be treated as one thick tube.

The gunmakers’ formulas for the strength of the gun are obtained
from considering the strength of a thick cylinder exposed
to unequal internal and external pressures. Supposing
a transverse section of the gun to cut through n tubes,
the internal radius of the barrel is 𝑟₀ in., the external
radius 𝑟₁ in., the external radius of the second course
is 𝑟₂ and so on; and the external radius of the jacket is 𝑟𝑛.
Then if T=a circumferential stress (tension) in tons per
square inch, T𝑛=a circumferential stress at radius 𝑟𝑛
in., P=a radial stress (pressure) in tons per square
inch, and P𝑛=a radial stress at radius 𝑟𝑛 in., the
formulas used in the calculation of the strength of built-up
guns are as follows:—



«EQN:1»T=P𝑛−₁𝑟𝑛−₁−P𝑛𝑟𝑛²/𝑟𝑛² − 𝑟𝑛−₁² + 𝑟𝑛−₁²𝑟𝑛²/𝑟² P𝑛−₁ − P𝑛/𝑟𝑛² − 𝑟𝑛−₁²«/EQN»





«EQN:2»P=𝑟𝑛−₁²𝑟𝑛²/𝑟² P𝑛−₁ − P𝑛/𝑟𝑛² − 𝑟𝑛−₁² − P𝑛−₁𝑟𝑛−₁−P𝑛𝑟𝑛²/𝑟𝑛² − 𝑟𝑛−₁²«/EQN»



where 𝑟 is any intermediate radius in the thickness of a tube


«EQN:3»T𝑛 − P𝑛=T − P«/EQN»



in the same tube; also the pressure between the (𝑛−1)𝑡ℎ and 𝑛𝑡ℎ
hoops is



«EQN:4»P𝑛−₁=𝑟𝑛−₁² − 𝑟𝑛²/𝑟𝑛² + 𝑟𝑛−₁² (T𝑛−₁ + P𝑛) + P𝑛«/EQN»



Equation (4) is usually known as the «I»Gunmakers’ formula«/I» and
from it, when P𝑛 and T𝑛−₁, T𝑛−₂... are known the other pressures
can be found. The proof tension of the material is kept well below
the yielding stress. For ordinary carbon gun steel it is usual to
consider that the proof tension of the barrel should not exceed 15
tons and of the outer hoops 18 tons per square inch; with nickel
gun steel these become 20 tons and 24 tons respectively. If the
𝑛𝑡ℎ hoop is the exterior tube then P𝑛=0; neglecting the atmospheric
pressure.

In all gun calculations for strength three cases must be considered:

(«I»a«/I») When the built-up gun is fired, the stress is called the «I»Firing Stress«/I» and is obtained by the repeated use of equation (4);

(«I»b«/I») When the gun, supposed to be a solid homogeneous block of metal is fired, the stress is termed the Powder Stress and is obtained from the equations (1) and (2);

(«I»c«/I») When the built-up gun is in repose, the stress is then called the «I»Initial Stress«/I» or «I»Stress of Repose«/I».

Between these three cases the following relations hold:—



«EQN:5»«I»Initial Stress«/I» + «I»Powder Stress«/I»=«I»Firing Stress«/I»«/EQN»



It is best to use different symbols to distinguish each kind of
stress. We will use for the Firing Stress P, T; for Powder Stress
𝑝, 𝑡; and for the Initial Stress (𝑝), (𝑡).

The method of working will be illustrated by a practical example.
Take, for instance, a section across the chamber of a 4·7-in. Q.F.
gun, for which the diameter of the chamber is 5 in., that of the
barrel 8·2 in., and the external diameter of the jacket 15 in.

Here   𝑟₀=2·5; 𝑟₁=4·1; 𝑟₂=7·5 
     T₀=15; T₁=18; P₂=0. 

From (4) for the «I»Firing Stress«/I»

:P₁=(7·5)² − (4·1)²/(7·5)² + (4·1)²×18=9·72 tons per square inch.

:P₀=(4·1)² − (2·5)²/(4·1)² + (2·5)²×(15+9·72)+9·72=21 tons per square inch.

From (3) the tension T′𝑛 of the outer fibres of the hoops is obtained;
thus

:T′₂=P₂+T₁−P₁=18−9·72=8·28 tons per square inch.

:T′₁=P₁+T₀−P₀=9·72+15−21 =3·72 tons per square inch.

For any intermediate radius r the stress can be found by using
equations (1) and (2) or (1) or (2) and (3).

For the «I»Powder Stress«/I» equations (1) and (2) are used by putting
𝑛=1, and then 𝑝₁=0 (also remembering that, as there are two
hoops, the outer radius must be written 𝑟₂); the formulas become



«EQN:6»𝑡=𝑟₀² 𝑟₂² + 𝑟²/𝑟² + 𝑟₂² − 𝑟₀² 𝑝₀«/EQN»





«EQN:7»𝑝=𝑟₀² 𝑟₂² − 𝑟²/𝑟² + 𝑟₂² − 𝑟₀² 𝑝₀«/EQN»



When 𝑟=𝑟₀=2·5, 𝑡 =𝑡₀, 𝑝₀=P₀ already found and:

«CTR»𝑡₀=(7·5)² + (2·5)²/(7·5)² − (2·5)²×21=26·25 tons.«/CTR»

For the tension of the fibres at the outer circumference

«CTR»𝑡′₂=26·25 − 21=5·25 tons,«/CTR»

from (3) and for a radius 𝑟₂=7·5 inches.

The stress for any intermediate radius 𝑟 can be obtained from
(6) and (7) or, from (6) or (7) and (3).

Subtracting the «I»Powder Stress«/I» from the «I»Firing Stress«/I» the «I»Initial«/I»
«I»Stress«/I» is obtained, and the various results can be tabulated as
follows:—
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="text-align:center"><tr><td rowspan="2" colspan="2">At Radius.</td><td colspan="3">Tensions.</td><td colspan="3">Pressures.</td></tr><tr style="border:1px solid black"><td>Firing<br>Stress.</td><td>Powder<br>Stress.</td><td>Initial<br>Stress.</td><td>Firing<br>Stress.</td><td>Powder<br>Stress.</td><td>Initial<br>Stress.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Barrel «BRACE2[2|l]»</td><td style="border-left:1px solid transparent">𝑟₀=2·5</td><td>15·0 </td><td>26·25</td><td>−11·25 </td><td>21·0 </td><td>21·0 </td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td style="border-left:1px solid transparent">𝑟₀=4·1</td><td> 3·72</td><td>11·57</td><td>−7·85</td><td> 9·72</td><td> 6·32</td><td>3·4</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Jacket «BRACE2[2|l]»</td><td style="border-left:1px solid transparent">𝑟₀=4·1</td><td>18·0 </td><td>11·57</td><td> 6·43</td><td> 9·72</td><td> 6·32</td><td>3·4</td></tr><tr><td style="border-left:1px solid transparent">𝑟₀=7·5</td><td> 8·28</td><td> 5·25</td><td> 3·03</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>0</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

It is generally stipulated that the initial compression of the
material at the interior surface of the barrel shall not exceed
26 tons per square inch, «I»i.e.«/I» (𝑡₀) =−26 tons; in the example above
(𝑡₀) =−11·25 tons only, but in wire-wound guns special attention
to this condition is necessary.

It now remains for the designer so to dimension the several
hoops that they shall, when shrunk together, give the stresses
found by calculation. To do this the exterior diameter of the
barrel must be a little larger than the interior diameter of the
covering hoop; after this hoop is shrunk on to the barrel its
exterior diameter is turned in a lathe so that it is slightly larger
than the interior of the next course hoop and so on. It will be
seen that the fibres of the barrel must be compressed while the
fibres of the superimposed hoop are extended, and thus produce
the «I»Initial Stress«/I». The shrinkage S may be defined as the excess
of the external diameter of the tube over the internal diameter of
the hoop, when separate and both are in the cold state. ThenPAGE:244ii. 𝑛S𝑛₊₁ denotes the shrinkage between the 𝑛𝑡ℎ and (𝑛 + 1)𝑡ℎ
hoops.

𝑛S𝑛₊₁ =2𝑟𝑛/M{ (𝑡𝑛 − 𝑡′𝑛)} (8)
=2𝑟𝑛/M «XL»[«/XL»  (𝑡𝑛 − 𝑡𝑛−₁) + 𝑟𝑛² − 𝑟𝑛²−₁/𝑟𝑛² + 𝑟𝑛²−₁ {(𝑡𝑛−1) + (𝑝𝑛)} «XL»]«/XL» (9).
Here M can be taken as 12,500 tons per square inch for
gun steel. In the example already calculated the shrinkage
between the jacket and barrel is 0·009 in.

«CTR»S=2 × 4·1/12,500 «XL»[«/XL» 6·43 + 11·25 + (4·1)² − (2·5)²/(4·1)² + (2·5)²(−11·25 + 3·4) «XL»]«/XL»=0·009 in.«/CTR»

In that portion of the gun in which wire is used in the construction,
exactly the same principles are involved. It may be
assumed that the tube on which the wire is wound is so
large, in comparison to the thickness of the wire, that
the compression of the concave surface of the wire and
the extension of its convex surface may be neglected without «SH»Wire guns.«/SH» sensible error.

The greatest advantage is obtained from the wire coils when
in the Firing Stress the tension T is uniform throughout the thickness
of the wiring. The Firing Stress T in the wire may be as low
as 25 tons per square inch and as high as 50 tons, but as the yielding
strength of the wire is never less than 80 tons per square inch nor
its breaking strength less than 90 tons, there is still an ample
margin especially when it is remembered that the factor of safety
is included in the calculation.

If the wire is wound direct on to the barrel and is covered by a
jacket, 𝑟₀, 𝑟₁ being the radii in inches of the barrel, 𝑟₁, 𝑟₂ the radii
of the internal and external layers of wire, and 𝑟₂, 𝑟₃ the radii of the
jacket; then for the Firing Stress in the wire



«EQN:9»T(𝑟₂−𝑟)=P𝑟−P₂𝑟₂«/EQN»



or



«EQN:10»T(𝑟−𝑟₁)=P₁𝑟₁−P𝑟«/EQN»



By combining these the gunmakers’ formula for the wire is obtained



«EQN:10«I»a«/I»»P₁=𝑟₂ − 𝑟₁/𝑟₁ (T + P₂) + P₂«/EQN»

 

As T is to be uniform, when the gun is fired, the Initial Tensions
of the wire are arranged accordingly, and the tensions at which the
wire must be wound on to the guns have now to be determined.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable"><tr><td>Let θ</td><td>=the winding tension at radius 𝑟 in.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:right">(𝑡)</td><td>=the initial tension at radius 𝑟 in.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:right">(𝑝)</td><td>=the radial pressure between any two layers of wire at radius 𝑟 in.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

It is assumed that M is uniform for the gun steel and wire.

Then



«EQN:11»θ=(𝑡) + (𝑝)𝑟² + 𝑟₀ ²/𝑟² − 𝑟₀²«/EQN»



where



«EQN:12»(𝑡)=T − P₀𝑟₀²/𝑟² 𝑟₃² + 𝑟²/𝑟₃² − 𝑟₀²«/EQN»



and



«EQN:13»(𝑝)=P − P₀𝑟₀²/𝑟² 𝑟₃² − 𝑟²/𝑟₃² − 𝑟₀²«/EQN»



By means of these two equations and (9) the expression (11)
becomes


«EQN:14»θ=E/𝑟 + F/𝑟 − 𝑟₀ + G/𝑟 + 𝑟₀«/EQN»


where

«CTR»E=−(T+P₂)𝑟₂«/CTR»

«CTR»F=(T + P₂)𝑟₂ − (T + P₀)𝑟₀«/CTR»

«CTR»G=(T + P₂)𝑟₂ + (T + P₀)𝑟₀«/CTR»

To compare with the previous example, the stress for a 4·7-in.
Q.F. wire gun will be calculated. This consists of a barrel, intermediate
layer of wire and jacket.

Here 𝑟₀=2·5; 𝑟₁=3·75; 𝑟₂=5·5; 𝑟₃=7·5 inches; the firing tension
T₁ to T₂ of the wire=25 tons per square inch, suppose.

Take P₀ = 21 tons per square inch and consider that the jacket
fits tightly over the wire, but has no shrinkage. Then for the
«I»Firing Stress«/I», from (2), P₂=2·25 tons, 
and from (9) and (10), T₁(𝑟₂-𝑟₁) = P₁𝑟₁-P₂𝑟₂

«CTR»P₁=14·97, say 15 tons;«/CTR»

from (4) we can obtain T₀ and T₂ since P₀, P₁ and P₂ are known;
from (3) T₀ = 0·6 tons. T₂ = 7·5 tons.

«CTR»T′₂=−5·4 tons (a compression),«/CTR»

and

«CTR»T₃=5·25 tons.«/CTR»

The «I»Powder Stress«/I» is obtained in the same way as in the previous
example, so also is the «I»Initial Stress«/I»; therefore we may tabulate as
follows:—
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder"><tr style="text-align:center;border:1px solid black"><td rowspan="2" colspan="3">At Radius.</td><td colspan="3">Tensions.</td><td colspan="3">Pressures.</td></tr><tr style="text-align:center;border:1px solid black"><td>Firing<br>Stress.</td><td>Powder<br>Stress.</td><td>Initial<br>Stress.</td><td>Firing<br>Stress.</td><td>Powder<br>Stress.</td><td>Initial<br>Stress.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Barrel</td><td rowspan="2" style="border-left:1px solid transparent;border-right:1px solid transparent">«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»</td><td>𝑟₀=2·5</td><td> 0·6</td><td>26·25</td><td>−26·25</td><td>21·0</td><td>21·0</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td></tr><tr><td>𝑟₁=3·75 </td><td>−5·4</td><td>13·125</td><td>−18·125</td><td>15·0</td><td> 7·875</td><td>7·125</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Wire</td><td rowspan="2" style="border-left:1px solid transparent;border-right:1px solid transparent">«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»</td><td>𝑟₀=3·75</td><td>25·0</td><td>13·125</td><td> 11·875</td><td>15·0</td><td> 7·875</td><td>7·125</td></tr><tr><td>𝑟₂=5·5</td><td>25·0</td><td> 7·125</td><td> 17·5</td><td> 2·25</td><td> 2·25</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Jacket</td><td rowspan="2" style="border-left:1px solid transparent;border-right:1px solid transparent">«MATH:\Big\{«/MATH»</td><td>𝑟₂=5·5</td><td> 7·5</td><td> 7·5</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td><td> 2·25</td><td> 2·25</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td></tr><tr><td>𝑟₃=7·5</td><td> 5·25</td><td> 5·25</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td><td style="text-align:center">0</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

As the wire is wound on, the pressure of the external layers will
compress those on the interior, thus producing an extension in the
wire which is equivalent to a reduction in the winding tension θ
of the particular layer at radius 𝑟 considered. If τ represents this
reduction then
«CTR»θ=(𝑡) − τ,«/CTR»
where

«CTR»τ=−𝑟𝑛² + 𝑟₀²/𝑟² − 𝑟₀²(𝑝)«/CTR»

At the interior layer of wire τ is the initial stress on the exterior
of the barrel and the winding tension must commence at

«CTR»θ= 11·875 + 18·525=30·4 tons per square inch.«/CTR»

As the jacket is supposed to have no shrinkage T=0 and consequently

«CTR»θ=(𝑡)=17·5 tons per square inch.«/CTR»

These winding tensions can be found directly from formula (14)
and then

«CTR»E=−149·875; F=34·875; G=264·875.«/CTR»

Sir G. Greenhill has put these formulas, both for the built-up and
wire-wound guns, into an extremely neat and practical geometrical
form, which can be used instead of the arithmetical processes; for
these see «I»Text-Book of Gunnery«/I», «I»Treatise of Service Ordnance«/I», 1893,
and «I»Journal of the United States Artillery«/I», vol. iv.

The longitudinal strength of the gun is very important especially
at the breech end; along the forward portion of the gun the thickness
of the barrel and the interlocking of the covering hoops
provide ample strength, but at the breech special provision
must be made. It is usual to provide for this by
means of a strong breech piece or jacket in small guns or «SH»Longitudinal stress.«/SH» by both combined in large ones. Its amount is easily calculated on
the hypothesis that the stress is uniformly distributed throughout
the thickness of the breech piece, or jacket, or of both. If 𝑟₀ is the
largest radius of the gun chamber, 𝑟₀₁ the radius of the obturator
seating, 𝑟₁ the external radius of the barrel, and P₀ the maximum
powder pressure, then, with the usual form of chamber adopted with
guns fitted with obturation other than cartridge cases, there will be
a longitudinal stress on the barrel at the breech end of the chamber
due to the action of the pressure P₀ on the rear slope of the chamber,
of

«CTR»π/4(𝑟₀² − 𝑟₀₁²)P₀ tons«/CTR»

this is resisted by the barrel of section π/4 (𝑟₁²−𝑟₀²) so that the resistance

«CTR»R=𝑟₀²−𝑟₀₁²/𝑟₁²−𝑟₀² P₀ tons.«/CTR»

This portion of the longitudinal stress is not of great importance
as the breech end of the barrel is supported in all modern designs
by the breech bush. In Q.F. guns, «I»i.e.«/I» those firing cartridge cases,
the breech end of the chamber has the largest diameter, and 𝑟₀−𝑟₀₁
so that there is no longitudinal stress on the chamber part of the barrel.

For the breech piece or outer tube of radii 𝑟₁ and 𝑟₂, the resistance

«CTR»R=𝑟₀₁²/𝑟₂²−𝑟₁² P₀ tons for B.L. guns«BR»
 =𝑟₀²/𝑟₂²−𝑟₁² P₀ tons for Q.F. guns«/CTR»

If the longitudinal stress is taken by a jacket only, the resistance
is found in the same way.

Generally for ordinary gun steel, the longitudinal stress on the
material is always kept below 10 tons per square inch or 13 tons for
nickel steel; but even with these low figures there is also included a
factor of safety of 1·5 to 2. In large guns it is best to consider the
jacket as an auxiliary aid only to longitudinal resistance, as, owing
to the necessary connexions between it and the breech bush and its
distance from the centre of pressure, there is a possibility that it
may not be taking its proportionate share of the stress.

The thread of the breech screw and of the breech bush (or opening)
must be so proportioned as to sustain the full pressure on the maximum
obturator area; V or buttress shaped threads are always used
as they are stronger than other forms, but V threads have the great
advantage of centring the breech screw when under pressure.

In most modern B.L. guns fitted with de Bange obturation thePAGE:245diameter of the seating is made just large enough to freely admit
the projectile; this is usually considerably smaller than the maximum
diameter of the chamber, consequently a less area is exposed to the
gas pressure and less screw thread section is required.

The principal features of the various systems of construction of modern heavy guns may be briefly described.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 55-57.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Figs«/SC». 55-57.—British, French and American Construction.«/CTR»

Fig. 55 is that adopted in England. The barrel or “inner A
tube” is surmounted by a second layer which is either shrunk on
in two or three pieces, as at Elswick, or is formed of one
long piece called the “A tube,” as in the Woolwich
system. This second layer is covered with wire, and
over this is shrunk the chase hoop or B tube and the «SH»Systems of construction.«/SH» jacket. The breech bush is screwed into the rear end of the A tube
so that the principal longitudinal stress is taken by this tube.

Fig. 56 is the system adopted in the French service. In this the
barrel is surmounted over the breech end with two layers of short
thin hoops, which consequently approximate to the wire system.
Over the muzzle end two or three long tubes are shrunk; the chase hoop
is also screwed to the barrel near the muzzle. A jacket is
shrunk over the breech portion of the gun, and the breech bush is
screwed into it at the rear end. The gun is further strengthened by
a long tube in front of the jacket to which it is attached by a screwed
collar.

Fig. 57 shows the design adopted for the United States navy.
Here the barrel is surmounted by a second course in two lengths,
and over the breech a third and fourth layer are shrunk. The
breech screw is screwed into the rear end of the second course.

Fig. 58 is the Krupp system, of which, however, it is an old example;
it is believed, however, that Krupp still retains the essential peculiarities
of this design, viz. that over the breech end of the barrel is
shrunk a solid breech piece, made particularly massive in rear
where the breech wedge is seated. The remainder of the layers
consist of hoops which are comparatively short but may be covered
with longer thin tubes.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 58.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 58.—Krupp Construction.«/CTR»

When guns are fired, the interior surface is gradually worn away
by the action of the powder gases; the breech end of the rifled
portion of the bore becomes enlarged, and the rifling
itself partly obliterated. The ballistics suffer in consequence
of the enlarged diameter of the bore, and the rifling may
be worn so much as not to properly rotate the «SH»Erosion.«/SH» projectile.

In all modern gun designs provision has, therefore, to be made
for repairing or replacing the barrel when it is worn out. There are
two methods of providing for the repair in the original design—the
first is by replacing the whole of the barrel by an entirely new one;
the second is to make the original barrel thick so that when it is
worn the interior can be bored out, either over a portion of its length
to cover the eroded part, or the full length for “through lining.”
In large guns it is usual to make the original barrel, if it is intended
to be removed as a whole, tapered from end to end, so that by warming
the gun in a vertical position breech downwards to about 300° F.
and then suddenly cooling the barrel by a jet of water it can be
knocked out by heavy blows from a falling weight. A new tapered
barrel can then be inserted by driving it in. When a gun which had
originally a thick barrel is lined part of the barrel is bored out in a
machine, and it is usual to make the hole tapered so that a new
tapered liner can be inserted and driven home.

The wearing of the barrel owing to erosion is one of the mo.st
difficult problems the gun constructor has to face. Sir Andrew Noble
(see “Some Modern Explosives,” a paper read at the Royal Institution,
1900, also “Researches on Explosives,” part iii., «I»Phil. Trans. Roy.«/I»
«I»Soc.«/I») has conclusively proved that the erosion is mainly dependent
on the very high temperature to which the interior surface of the
gun is raised and on the quantity of this heat. Both these factors
are, for any particular explosive, determined by some function of
the proportion of the weight of the charge to the extent of the
exposed surface. The passage for the products of combustion
gradually reduces from the maximum diameter of the chamber to
the diameter of the bore. The highly heated gases therefore impinge
more directly on that part of the bore which forms the seating for
the shot and acts on it for the longest time, «I»i.e.«/I» for the whole time
the shot is in the gun. Consequently this part suffers most wear.

It may be assumed that the weights of the charges vary as the
cube of the diameters of the bore, while the circumference of the
bore varies directly as the calibre; now as the wear depends principally
on the weight of the charge in relation to the exposed surface
at the shot seating it varies as the square of the calibre. It is
evident too that the allowable wear will vary as the calibre, so that
the life of the gun or the number of rounds which can be fired is
inversely proportionate to the calibre.

The heat of combustion and the time of burning of the explosive
are factors in determining the amount of heat developed per unit
of time, and thus influence the proportion of heat conducted away
from the interior surface of the gun. The time of burning of the
explosive depends on the size and form of the explosive and on
the density of loading, while the heat of combustion depends on its
composition and cannot be treated of here, but it may be stated
generally that for equal weights Ballistite is more erosive than
Cordite Mark I., and Cordite Mark I. than Cordite M.D. All of
these explosives contain a fairly large proportion of nitro-glycerine,
and it is found that as the proportion of this ingredient is reduced
the erosion also decreases, so that for pure nitro-cellulose powders
it is less still. Unfortunately pure nitro-cellulose powders are not
ballistically equal to the same weight of nitroglycerin powder;
the advantage of the less erosive action is lost owing to the greater
weight of pure nitro-cellulose explosive required to obtain the same
ballistics.

The effect of erosion on large high-power guns is serious, for in aPAGE:24612-in. gun after some 150 or fewer rounds are fired with a full charge
the barrel is worn so much as to need replacing. In the British
service it is considered that the wear produced by firing sixteen half
charges is equivalent to that of one full charge.

In small high-velocity guns the number of rounds with full charge
which can be fired without replacing the barrel is considerably greater;
while for low-velocity guns the number is higher still. In some guns
this number appears abnormally high; in others of exactly similar
type it may be low and for no apparent reason.

The first effect of the powder gases on the steel is a very characteristic
hardening of the surface of the whole of the bore; so much
is this the case that it is difficult to carry out any mechanical operation,
except grinding, after a gun has been fired. When ignited the
explosive contained in the chamber of the gun burns fiercely, and as
the projectile travels along the bore the highly heated gases follow.
The surface of the bore near the chamber is naturally the most
highly heated and for the longest time; here too the rush of gas is
greatest. There is in consequence a film of steel swept off from the
surface, but this becomes less as the distance from the chamber
becomes greater, owing to the abstraction of heat by the bore. It
is a noticeable fact that only where a decided movement of gas
takes place is there any erosion: thus, towards the breech end of
the chamber where no rush of gas occurs there is no perceptible
erosion, even after many rounds have been fired. Again, at the
muzzle end there is very little erosion, as here the gases are in
contact with the bore for a minute fraction of time.

As the firing proceeds, the interior surface of the bore, where the
erosion is greatest, becomes covered with a network of very fine
cracks running both longitudinally and circumferentially. The
sides of these cracks in their turn become eroded and gradually
fissures are formed. With the old black and brown powders these
fissures were a feature of the erosion, while with the new type
smokeless powders the eroded surface is usually smooth, and it is
only after prolonged firing that fissures occur although fine cracks
occur after a comparatively few rounds have been fired.

«SC»Bibliography«/SC».—English: Nye, «I»The Art of Gunnery«/I» (1670);
Norton, «I»The Gunner«/I», «I»showing the whole Practice of Artillerie«/I» (London,
1628); Sir Jonas Moore, «I»Treatise of Artillery«/I» (London, 1683);
Robins, «I»New Principles of Gunnery«/I» (London, 1742); Hutton, «I»Tracts«/I»
(London, 1812); Sir Howard Douglas, R.A., «I»Naval Gunnery«/I» (London,
1855); Mallet, Construction of Artillery (London, 1856); Boxer,
«I»Treatise on Artillery«/I» (London, 1856); Owen, «I»Modern Artillery«/I»
(London, 1871); «I»Text-Book Rifled Ordnance«/I» (London, 1877);
Treatise on Construction of Ordnance (London, 1879); Lloyd and
Hadcock, «I»Artillery: its Progress and Present Position«/I» (Portsmouth,
1893); «I»Treatise on Service Ordnance«/I» (London, 1893–1904); «I»Catalogue«/I»
«I»of Museum of Artillery in the Rotunda«/I» (Woolwich, 1906); Sir
Andrew Noble, «I»Artillery and Explosives«/I» (1906); Brassey, «I»Naval«/I»
«I»Annual«/I». United States: A. L. Holley, «I»Ordnance and Armour«/I»
(New York, 1865); E. Simpson, «I»Ordnance and Naval Gunnery«/I» (New
York, 1862); «I»Resistance of Guns to Tangential Rupture«/I» (Washington,
1892); «I»Annual Reports of Chief of Ordnance«/I»; Fullam and Hart,
«I»Text-Book of Ordnance and Gunnery«/I» (Annapolis, 1905); O. M. Lissak,
«I»Ordnance and Gunnery«/I» (New York, 1907). French: Jacob, «I»Resistance«/I»
«I»et construction des bouches à feu«/I» (Paris, 1909); De Lagabbe,
«I»Matériel d’artillerie«/I» (Paris, 1903); «I»Manuel du canonnier«/I» (1907);
Alvin, «I»Leçons sur l’artillerie«/I» (Paris, 1908). German and Austrian:
Kaiser, «I»Konstruktion der gezogenen Geschützröhre«/I» (Vienna, 1900);
Indra, «I»Die wahre Gestalt der Spannungskurve«/I» (Vienna, 1901).
Italian: Tartaglia, «I»La Nuova Scienta«/I» (Venice, 1562); Bianchi,
«I»Materiale d’artiglieria«/I» (Turin, 1905). 

«CTR»«SC»II. Field Artillery Equipments«/SC»«/CTR»

«I»General Principles«/I».—A field gun may be considered as a
machine for delivering shrapnel bullets and high-explosive shell
at a given distant point. The power of the machine is limited
by its weight, and this is limited by the load which a team of
six horses is able to pull at a trot on the road and across open
country. For under these conditions it is found that six is the
maximum number of horses which can work in one team without
loss of efficiency. The most suitable load for a gun-team is
variously estimated by different nations, according to the size
of the horses available and to the nature of the country in the
probable theatre of war. Thus in England the field artillery
load is fixed at 43 cwt. behind the traces; France, 42·5 cwt.,
Germany 41·5 cwt., and Japan (1903) 30 cwt. This load consists
of the gun with carriage and shield, the limber with ammunition
and entrenching tools, and the gunners with their kits and
accoutrements. The weights may be variously distributed, subject
to the condition that for ease of draught the weight on the
gun wheels must not greatly exceed that on the limber wheels.
It is still usual to carry two gunners on seats on the gun axletree,
and two on the limber. But a Q.F. gun capable of firing 20
rounds a minute requires to be constantly accompanied by an
ammunition wagon, and the modern tendency is to take advantage
of this to carry some of the gunners on the wagon. Thus in
the British field artillery two gunners are carried on the gun
limber, two on the wagon limber, one on the wagon body and
none on the gun. These five gunners, with the sergeant, called
the No. 1, on his horse, make a full gun-detachment. Three
wagons for each gun usually are provided, two of which, with the
spare gunners and non-commissioned officers, are posted under
cover at some distance behind the battery. Besides lightening
the weight on the gun, the presence of the wagon allows the
number of rounds in the limber to be reduced. The result of
this redistribution of weights is that field artillery may now be
equipped with a much heavier and more powerful gun than was
formerly the case. A gun weighing 24 cwt. in action is about as
heavy as a detachment of six can man-handle.

The power of a field gun is measured by its muzzle energy,
which is proportional to the weight of the shell multiplied by the
square of its velocity. The muzzle energy varies in different
equipments from 230 to 380 foot-tons. Details of the power,
weight and dimensions of the guns of the principal military
nations are given in Table A.

A gun of given weight and power may fire a heavy shell with
a low velocity, or a light shell with a high velocity. High velocity
is the gunner’s ideal, for it implies a flat trajectory and a small
angle of descent. The bullets when blown forward out of the
shrapnel fly at first almost parallel to the surface of the ground,
covering at medium ranges a depth of some 350 yards, as against
half that distance for a low-velocity gun. Under modern
tactical conditions a deep zone of shrapnel effect is most desirable.
On the other hand, for a given power of gun, flatness of trajectory
means a corresponding reduction in the weight of the shell;
that is, in the number of shrapnel bullets discharged per minute.
We have accordingly to compromise between high velocity
and great shell power. Thus the British field gun fires an 18½ lb
shell with muzzle velocity of 1590 ft. per second, while the French
gun, which is practically of the same power, fires a 16 lb shell with
M.V. of 1740 f.s. Again, a shell of given weight may be fired
either from a large-bore gun or from a small-bore gun; in the
latter case the length of the shell will be proportionately increased.
The small-bore gun is naturally the lighter of the two. But the
longer the shell the thicker must its walls be, in order not to
break up or collapse in the gun. The shorter the shell, the
higher is the percentage of useful weight, consisting of powder
and bullets, which it contains. We must, therefore, compromise
between these antagonistic conditions, and select the calibre
which gives the maximum useful weight of projectiles for a given
weight of equipment. In practice it is found that a calibre of
3 in. is best suited to a shell weighing 15 lb; and that, starting
with this ratio, the calibre should vary as the cube root of the
weight of the shell.

As to rifling, the relative advantages of uniform and increasing
twist are disputed. The British field guns are rifled with uniform
twist, but the balance of European opinion is in favour of a
twist increasing from 1 turn in 50 calibres at the breech to 1 in 25
at the muzzle. Mathematically, the development of the groove
is a parabola.

For field guns the favourite breech actions are the interrupted
screw and the wedge. The latter is simpler, but affords a less
powerful extractor for throwing out the empty cartridge case.
This point is of importance, since cartridge cases hastily manufactured
in war time might not all be true to gauge. Modern
guns have percussion locks, in which a striker impinges upon a
cap in the base of the metallic cartridge. All Q.F. guns have
repeating trip-locks. In these, when the firing-lever or lanyard
is pulled, the striker is first drawn back and then released, allowing
it to fly forward against the cap. The gun is usually fired
by the gun-layer; it is found that he lays more steadily if he
knows that the gun cannot go off till he is ready. A field gun
has to be sighted (see «LN:Sights|Sights«/LN») for laying («I»a«/I») by direct vision
(«I»b«/I») by clinometer and aiming-point (see «LN:Artillery|Artillery«/LN»). The first
purpose is served by the ordinary and telescopic sights; the
second by the goniometric sight or the panorama sight. ThePAGE:247«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="font-size:90%;line-height:120%;text-align:center"><caption>TABLE A.—FIELD GUNS<br> («I»Corrected to May 1«/I», «I»1910«/I», «I»in accordance with Bethell’s«/I» “«I»Modern Guns and Gunnery«/I»,” «I»3rd edition«/I».)</caption><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>Austria<br>1905.</td><td>Belgium<br>1905.</td><td>Brazil<br>1904.</td><td>Denmark<br>1902.</td><td>France<br>1898–<br>1902.</td><td>Germany<br>1906.</td><td>Great<br>Britain<br>F.A·<br>1903.</td><td>Great<br>Britain<br>H.A·<br>1903.</td><td>Italy<br>1906.</td><td>Japan<br>1905.</td><td>Rumania<br>1904.</td><td>Russia<br>1903.</td><td>Spain<br>1906.</td><td>Switzer-<br>land<br>1903.</td><td>United<br>States<br>1902.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Calibre, inches</td><td>3·01</td><td>2·95</td><td>295</td><td>2·95</td><td>2·95</td><td>3·03</td><td>3·3</td><td>3</td><td>2·95</td><td>2·95</td><td>2·95</td><td>3</td><td>2·95</td><td>2·95</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Weight of shrapnel, lb.</td><td>14·72</td><td>14·3</td><td>12·1</td><td>14·85</td><td>15·96</td><td>15</td><td>1848</td><td>12·54</td><td>14·3</td><td>14·3</td><td>14·3</td><td>14·41*</td><td>14·3</td><td>14</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Number of bullets. .</td><td>316+16</td><td>360</td><td>235</td><td>295</td><td>300</td><td>300</td><td>364</td><td>263</td><td>360</td><td>210</td><td>295</td><td>260</td><td>294</td><td>210</td><td>252</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Number of bullets to the lb.</td><td>50 and 35</td><td>50</td><td>42</td><td>41·3</td><td>38</td><td>45</td><td>42</td><td>42</td><td>50</td><td>36·4</td><td>42</td><td>43</td><td>45</td><td>36·3</td><td>36·5</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Whether H.E. shell carried</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Muzzle velocity, f.-s.</td><td>1640</td><td>1640</td><td>1600</td><td>1640</td><td>1739</td><td>1525</td><td>1590</td><td>1658</td><td>1675</td><td>1706</td><td>1640</td><td>1930</td><td>1640</td><td>1590</td><td>1700</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Muzzle energy, ft.-tons</td><td>275</td><td>266</td><td>215</td><td>277</td><td>334</td><td>242</td><td>324</td><td>239</td><td>279</td><td>288</td><td>267</td><td>373</td><td>267</td><td>245</td><td>300</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Weight of gun, cwt.</td><td>7</td><td>6·67</td><td>5·7</td><td>6·42</td><td>9</td><td>7·66</td><td>9</td><td>6</td><td>6·9</td><td>6·8*</td><td>7·37</td><td>7·85</td><td>6·67</td><td>6·48</td><td>6·9</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Weight of gun and carriage</td><td>20</td><td>20</td><td>16·3</td><td>20·5</td><td>22·4</td><td>186</td><td>24·75</td><td>195</td><td>19·75</td><td>19·7</td><td>21</td><td>20·75</td><td>20·4</td><td>19·75</td><td>21</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Weight of gun and limber filled</td><td>37·5</td><td>34·5</td><td>26·7</td><td>36·6</td><td>37</td><td>34·4</td><td>40</td><td>32·5</td><td>33·45</td><td>33·2 5</td><td>34·8</td><td>38·5</td><td>34·2</td><td>35·5</td><td>37·3</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Maximum elevation, degrees</td><td>18</td><td>15</td><td>17</td><td>15</td><td>17</td><td>16</td><td>16</td><td>17</td><td>17</td><td>17*</td><td>16</td><td>164</td><td>16</td><td>16</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Traverse each way, degrees</td><td>4</td><td>3½</td><td>3</td><td>3½</td><td>3</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>3</td><td>3½</td><td>3</td><td>2¾</td><td>3</td><td>2</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Length of recoil, inches</td><td>51·5</td><td>51</td><td>44</td><td>54</td><td>43</td><td>44</td><td>48</td><td>48</td><td>57</td><td>55</td><td>54</td><td>42·5</td><td>50</td><td>53</td><td>50</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Height of wheels</td><td>4′ 3″</td><td>4′ 3¼″</td><td>4′ 2″</td><td>4' 3″</td><td>4′*</td><td>4′ 5¼″</td><td>4′ 8″</td><td>4′ 8″</td><td>4′ 3½″</td><td>4′ 3½″*</td><td>4′ 3½″</td><td>4′ 4″</td><td>4′ 3½″</td><td>4′ 3½″</td><td>4' 8″</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Line of sight, whether independent </td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>No</td><td>No</td><td>Yes</td><td>No</td><td>No</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Sights, goniometric, telescopic,<br> panorama or ordinary</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>G.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>T.P.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>O.P.</td><td>T.G.</td><td>0.</td><td>O.P.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Length of gun, calibres .</td><td>30</td><td>30</td><td>28</td><td>30</td><td>36</td><td>27·3</td><td>29·4</td><td>24·4</td><td>30</td><td>30</td><td>30</td><td>30</td><td>30</td><td>30</td><td>29·2</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Breech action, wedge, swinging<br> block,or eccentric screw</td><td>W.</td><td>W.</td><td>W.</td><td>W.</td><td>E.S.</td><td>W.</td><td>S.B.</td><td>S.B.</td><td>W.</td><td>W.</td><td>W.</td><td>S.B.</td><td>S.B.</td><td>W.</td><td>S.B.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Thickness of shield, inches</td><td>0·18</td><td>0·2</td><td>0·177</td><td>0·236</td><td>0·2</td><td>0·155</td><td>0·155*</td><td>0·155*</td><td>0·1575</td><td>0·118</td><td>0·236</td><td>0·2</td><td>0·18</td><td>0·17</td><td>0·2</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Traverse on pivot or alongaxle</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>A.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td><td>A.</td><td>A.</td><td>P.</td><td>P.</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Number of rounds in limber.. .</td><td>33</td><td>40</td><td>32</td><td>44</td><td>24</td><td>36</td><td>24</td><td>24</td><td>32</td><td>36</td><td>24</td><td>36</td><td>38</td><td>40</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Number of rounds in wagon limber</td><td>30</td><td>40</td><td>40</td><td>48</td><td>24</td><td>36</td><td>28</td><td>28</td><td>32</td><td>36</td><td>24</td><td>40</td><td>38</td><td>48</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Number of rounds in wagon body</td><td>60</td><td>61</td><td>40</td><td>72</td><td>72</td><td>52</td><td>48</td><td>48</td><td>64</td><td>60</td><td>64</td><td>48</td><td>60</td><td>48</td><td>70</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Number of rounds per gun</td><td>168</td><td>242</td><td>192</td><td>284</td><td>312</td><td>126¹</td><td>176</td><td>176</td><td>224</td><td>228</td><td>288</td><td>212</td><td>278</td><td>280</td><td>358²</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">Weight of wagon, packed cwt.</td><td>38·5</td><td>35·3</td><td>24</td><td>39·4</td><td>38·5</td><td>35</td><td>36·75</td><td>30·5</td><td>36</td><td>34·5*</td><td>34</td><td>38</td><td>32</td><td>35·3</td><td>37</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">No. of guns in battery</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>6</td><td>6</td><td>6</td><td>6</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>8</td><td>4</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:left">No. of wagons in battery</td><td>9</td><td>8</td><td>8</td><td>8</td><td>12</td><td> 6¹</td><td>12</td><td>12</td><td>12</td><td>12</td><td>12</td><td>16</td><td>10</td><td>10</td><td>12</td></tr><tr style="border-top:1px solid"><td style="text-align:left">Maker.</td><td>State, Skoda<br>&Ehrhardt</td><td>Krupp<br>&<br>Cockerill</td><td>Krupp</td><td>Krupp</td><td>State</td><td>State</td><td colspan="2">State, Elswick<br>Ordnance Co.,<br>Vickers, Maxim and<br>Coventry Ordnance<br>Works</td><td>Krupp</td><td>State<br>and<br>Krupp</td><td>Krupp</td><td>Putilov</td><td>Schneider</td><td>Krupp</td><td>State<br>and<br>Ehrhardt</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«CTR»«FS[90%]»These weights do not include the gunners. Doubtful figures are marked thus.* ¹In addition to the wagons with light ammunition column, now raised to 62 per battery. ²Including four rounds with gun.«/FS»«/CTR»PAGE:248independent line of sight is an arrangement of sights and elevating
gear found in many modern field guns, which divides between
two gunners the work of aiming (called «I»laying«/I») the gun, and of
giving it the elevation required to hit the target.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance - Fig. 59.png|width=400}}</td></tr><tr><td>«FS[83%]»From Bethell’s «I»Modern Guns and Gunnery«/I».«/FS»</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:center;font-size:92%">«SC»Fig«/SC». 59.—Diagram illustrating the independent line of sight.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
In fig. 59 the gun is shown mounted on an intermediate
carriage elevated and depressed by the screw A. The telescopic
or ordinary sight is fixed to this carriage. The gun, in its cradle,
is elevated and depressed by the screw B. To lay the gun, the
layer works the laying screw A till the telescope points at the
target; the gun also, if no elevation has been given, is then
pointing straight at the target. To give the gun the elevation
necessary for the range, the elevating number on the right of
the gun now works the elevating screw B till the gun is sufficiently
elevated, the amount given being shown in yards of range on
a drum. The motion given to the gun does not disturb the
intermediate carriage with the telescope attached to it, and the
telescope still remains layed on the target. Once the sights are
layed on the target, the elevation of the gun may be changed
in a moment by a turn of the elevating wheel, without disturbing
the laying. The layer does not have to concern himself about the
elevation; he has only to keep his sights on the target while
the other numbers continue the service of the gun. This device
is especially valuable when firing at moving targets, when the
range and the laying have to be altered simultaneously.

The same result may also be obtained by other mechanical
devices without the use of the intermediate carriage. Thus the
British field guns have a long elevating screw with the sight
connected to its centre, the lower end passing through a nut at the
side of the upper carriage, the upper end through a nut at the
side of the cradle. Then, if the lower nut be turned by the
laying wheel, the screw, the sight and the gun will go up or down
together; if the upper nut be turned by the elevating wheel, the
gun will go up or down the screw without moving the sights.
Colonel Scott’s “automatic” line of sight is an improvement
on the ordinary gear in that the sight can be cross-levelled to
eliminate the error due to difference of level of wheels. Krupp
has a similar device in which the sight-socket is on the cradle so
that it can be cross-levelled. The sight itself is connected to the
elevating gear, and is screwed out of its socket as the breech
of the gun is depressed, so that the sight remains in the same
place.

«I»Construction of the Gun«/I».—Field guns are made of steel, usually
containing a small percentage of nickel or chromium, or both, and
having a tensile breaking strain of about 50 tons per square inch.
In Austria, for facility of local manufacture, hard-drawn bronze is
still used, although this is considerably heavier than steel.

«I»The Carriage«/I» (see «LN:Artillery|Artillery«/LN», Plate I.).—The first field guns
used in war were supported by crossed stakes under the muzzle and
anchored by a spike on the breech which penetrated into the
ground. The next improvement was to mount the gun on a sleigh.
This method is still used in Norway and in Canada. The next step
was to mount the gun on a two-wheeled carriage, connected to a
second two-wheeled carriage (the limber) by a flexible coupling.
For centuries the gun-carriage was a rigid construction, recoiling on
firing, and having to be run up by hand after each round. In 1895
spring-spade equipments were introduced. In these a spade attached
to a helical spring was set under the carriage; on discharge the
spade dug into the ground, compressing the spring as the carriage
recoiled. The extension of the spring ran the gun up again without
assistance from the gunners.

The British 15 pr. used in the South African War (1899–1902)
had a spring spade carriage designed by Sir George Clarke. Similar
equipments were introduced by several continental powers. The
Japanese gun used in Manchuria (1904) had dragshoes attached by
wire ropes passing round drums on the wheels to a strong spring in
the trail. On recoil the wheels revolved backwards, compressing
the spring; after recoil the pull of the spring on the wire ropes
revolved the wheels forward and returned the gun to its former
position. The Italian 1902 semi-Q.F. carriage was constructed on a
very similar principle. All these semi-Q.F. equipments were open
to the objection that the gunners had to stand clear of the shield
every time the gun was fired. They have since been superseded
by Q.F. gun-recoil equipments.

The gun-carriage must be strong enough to carry the gun across
country, and it must be so constructed as not to move when the
gun is fired. If the gun-carriage were allowed to recoil to the rear
on discharge, the gunners would have to stand clear on firing,
abandoning the protection of the shield, and, moreover, the loss of
time entailed by running up and relaying the gun would render the
fire slow. The requirement of steadiness of the carriage is met by
allowing the gun itself to recoil on its carriage. Its motion is gradually
checked by the hydraulic buffer (see below) and the gun is
returned to the firing position by helical springs, or, in the French,
Spanish and Portuguese equipments, by compressed air. The
carriage is held from recoiling by a spade fixed to the point of the
trail, which digs into the earth on discharge, and (usually) by
brakes on the wheels. This is known as the gun-recoil system, and
is now universally adopted. Field guns constructed on this principle
are styled Q.F., or quick-firing, guns.

«I»Steadiness of Carriage«/I».—In the gun-recoil equipment the constructional
difficulty lies not in preventing the carriage from recoiling
but in preventing the wheels from rising off the ground on
the shock of discharge. The force of recoil of the gun, acting in the
line of motion of the centre of gravity of the recoiling parts, tends to
turn the carriage over backwards about the point of the trail, or,
more correctly, about the centre of the spade. This force is resisted
by the weight of the gun and carriage, which tends to keep the
wheels on the ground. The leverage with which the overturning force
acts is that due to the distance of its line of motion above the centre
of the spade; the leverage with which the steadying force acts is
that due to the horizontal distance of the centre of gravity of the
gun and carriage from the centre of the spade. If the force of recoil
be 6 ft.-tons, and if it be absorbed during a recoil of 3 ft., the average
overturning force is 2 tons; since the weight of the gun in action
may not greatly exceed 1 ton, the trail must be so long as to give a
leverage of at least two to one in favour of the steadying force.
It follows from the above that the steadiness of the carriage, for a
given muzzle energy, may be promoted by four factors, («I»a«/I») Increasing
the weight of the gun and recoiling parts. This reduces the
recoil-energy, («I»b«/I») Increasing the length of recoil allowed. This
reduces the overturning pull, («I»c«/I») Keeping the gun as low as possible,
either by reducing the height of the wheels, or by cranking the axletree
downwards. This reduces the leverage of the overturning force.
(«I»d«/I») Increasing the length of the trail. This increases the leverage of
the steadying force.

It will be seen from Table A that the condition of steadiness is
satisfied in the various Q.F. equipments by not very dissimilar
combinations of the above factors.

The «I»cradle«/I» is the portion of the carriage upon which the gun slides
when it recoils. It also contains the buffer and running-up springs,
which are fixed either above or below the gun. The latter method
gives the stronger and simpler construction, and is favoured by all
nations except Great Britain. By putting the buffer on top the gun
can be set lower on the carriage, which is an advantage as regards
steadiness. A top-buffer cradle is of ring section, surrounding the
gun; the gun is formed with ribs or guides extending for its whole
length, which, on recoil, slide in grooves in the cradle. The cradle
is pivoted on horizontal trunnions to the intermediate carriage and
carries the buffer and springs on top. This construction is shown
in the illustration of the 18 pr. Q.F. gun (fig. 60, Plate III.).

In carriages having the buffer under the gun the cradle is a trough
of steel plate, usually closed in at the top. It has guides formed on
the upper edges fitted to take guide-blocks on the gun. The cradle
contains the buffer-cylinder, which is fixed to a horn projecting
downwards from the breech of the gun, and recoils with it; the
piston-rod is fixed to the front of the cradle. The running-up springs
are usually coiled round the buffer-cylinder, and, on recoil, are
compressed between a shoulder on the front end of the cylinder and
the rear plate of the cradle.

The «I»cradle«/I» is mounted on a vertical pivot set in a saddle pivoted
on horizontal trunnions between the sides of the trail (Krupp);
or, as in the earlier Ehrhardt equipments, the vertical pivot is set in
the axletree itself, which has then to turn when the gun is elevated
or depressed. The Krupp cradle is shown in the drawing of the
German gun.

The «I»buffer«/I» consists of a steel cylinder nearly filled with oil or
glycerine. In this cylinder works a piston with piston-rod attached
to the carriage; the cylinder is attached to the gun. On recoil the
piston is drawn from one end of the cylinder to the other, so that the
liquid is forced to flow past the piston. The friction thus caused
gradually absorbs the recoil of the gun and brings it gently to a
standstill. As the gun recoils the centre of gravity of the gun and
carriage shifts to the rear, reducing the stability. The buffer-resistance
has to be gradually reduced proportionately to the reducedPAGE:251stability. To allow the liquid to flow past the piston, grooves
(called «I»ports«/I») are formed in the sides of the cylinder, and by varying
the depth of the grooves at different points the resistance can be
adjusted as required.

«I»Running-up Gear«/I».—In compressed-air equipments a separate
piston is attached to the gun, working in a cylinder on the carriage
connected with a reservoir of air at a pressure of about 300 lb to the
square inch. This gear is much lighter than the springs, but the
difficulty of keeping the piston and gland tight is a serious objection
to it, although this difficulty is partly overcome by filling the cylinder
with glycerine so that the air has no direct access to the piston or
the gland. In spring equipments the principal difficulty lies in
providing a sufficient length of recoil without undue compression of
the column of springs. Thus if the spring column be 6 ft. long
and the gun recoils 4½ ft. the springs are compressed into a space
of 1½ ft., or a quarter of their working length. This treatment is
liable to crush the springs. German gun-makers get over this
difficulty by the use of very high-class springs made of steel having
a tenacity of about 140 tons to the square inch with an elastic limit
of 90 tons. They also use a valve in the buffer piston which relieves
the springs of resistance in running-up, and so allows slighter springs
to be used. But in England the telescopic spring-case patented by
the Elswick Ordnance Company is preferred. Suppose that the
spring-columns before firing are each 4 ft. long; then if the telescopic
gear be pulled out for a distance of 4 ft. on recoil, each spring column
will be compressed to 2 ft., or only to half its length. Tensile running up
springs are used by some firms, as Cockerill of Seraing (Liége).
They are open to the objection that if a spring breaks the gun is
for the time being rendered useless, which is not the case with
compression springs.

The intermediate carriage is used chiefly in equipments with
buffer above the gun; it serves as a means of connecting the cradle
to the lower carriage. When the spade is fixed in the ground it is
impossible to shift the carriage laterally in order to correct the
aim, the intermediate carriage is therefore pivoted so that it can
traverse laterally about 3 degrees each way. Instead of using an
intermediate carriage the direction may be given to the gun by
shifting the whole carriage sideways along the axle in an arc about
the point of the trail, which is fixed by the spade. This system is
used in guns of French manufacture and in the 1902 Russian gun.
It is simple in action, but requires the shield to be cut away on either
side to clear the wheels at extreme traverse.

The trail is either a drawn steel tube, of circular section as in the
18 pr., or of closed U section as in the Ehrhardt carriages, or else a
box trail built up of sheet steel. In the Krupp equipments the
trail is bent downwards to give a greater range of elevation to the
gun.

«I»Elevating Gear«/I», in order to save space, is usually of the telescopic
screw pattern, in which one screw is inside the other so that the
two pack into half the length of a single screw. The spade is of the
shape shown in the illustration of the 18 pr. Q.F. gun. For equipments
which may have to be used on rock, such as the Swiss gun,
the spade is made to fold upwards when desired. The axletree is
usually a hollow steel forging with the ends tapered to receive the
wheels. The wheels are of wood, with naves of stamped steel.
Steel wheels have been tried but are less elastic than wood and have
been found unsuitable. England and the United States use 4 ft. 8 in.
wheels; most European nations use wheels 4 ft. 3¼ in. in diameter.

The «I»shield«/I» is made of hard steel, from 0·12 to 0·236 in. thick.
The size and thickness of the shield are limited by considerations
of weight. Thus if 150 lb of weight be available this will provide a
shield about 5 ft. square and 3½ mm. or 0·138 in. thick, proof
against rifle bullets at distances over 600 yds., and against shrapnel
bullets at all distances. The present tendency, since the introduction
of the French D bullet and German S bullet (see «LN:Ammunition|Ammunition«/LN»:
Bullet), is to make shields thicker than this, 5 mm. or 0·2 in. being
the usual thickness.

«I»Recent Developments of the Q.F. Gun-Carriage«/I».—The principle of
“differential” recoil gear is as follows: Suppose an ordinary Q.F.
field gun held in the recoil position by a catch, loaded, released and
allowed to fly forward under the action of the running-up springs. A
valve in the buffer relieves the gun of any resistance to running-up.
While in rapid motion forward the gun is fired by a tripper which
catches the firing lever. The gun then returns to the recoil position
and is again held by the catch. On firing, the recoil-velocity is
reduced by the amount of the forward velocity previously imparted
to the gun. Thus if the ordinary recoil-velocity of a Q.F. gun be
30 fs., and if it be fired while running up at a velocity of 10 fs., the
recoil-velocity with respect to the carriage will be only 20 fs. And
since the recoil-energy is proportional to the weight of the gun
multiplied by the square of the recoil-velocity, the recoil-energy is
reduced in the proportion of 900 to 400, or roughly by one-half.
This halves the overturning stress on the carriage, and renders it
possible to make the gun and carriage lighter for the same power,
or to obtain greater power for the same weight. This increase of
efficiency is due to the fact that the whole of the recoil-energy is not,
as in ordinary Q.F. guns, absorbed by the friction in the buffer,
but that part of it is stored up and used to counteract the recoil
of the next round. If the hydraulic buffer be dispensed with, and
the whole of the recoil taken on the springs or compressed air gear.
the overturning stress is reduced to one-fourth of its normal amount.
One practical difficulty in the way of applying the differential
system to field guns lies in the vibration and slight lateral motion
of the carriage during running-up. Since this motion takes place after
laying and before firing, it is liable to cause inaccuracy. The only
equipment on this principle as yet in use is the French 1907 mountain
gun referred to below.

“Semi-automatic” Q.F. field and mountain guns are made by
the leading firms, but have not been generally introduced. In these
equipments the breech is thrown open by tripping gear during the
run-up, and the cartridge case is ejected. When the gun is reloaded
the action of introducing the cartridge releases the breech-block,
which is closed by a spring. In the Krupp semi-automatic gun the
breech-block is set vertically to facilitate loading. This equipment is
capable of firing thirty rounds per minute. The principal advantage
of the semi-automatic system lies not in the increased rate of fire
but in the fact that three gunners are sufficient to carry out the
service of the gun. This is of importance in mountain equipments,
where the size of the shield is limited.

The introduction of airships into military operations has produced
the auto-airship gun, which differs from the ordinary field
gun in almost every respect. The attack of airships presents special
problems. High elevation, higher even than the howitzer’s, may
have to be given, and, unlike the howitzer, the airship gun must be
a high-velocity weapon, both ranging power and flatness of trajectory
being essential. As regards the shell, to bring down a gasbag,
or even to kill a crew, with time shrapnel is difficult, owing to
the speed of the airship and the difficulty of observing bursts.
Direct hits with ordinary shell are equally hard to obtain, unless the
balloon is stationary and the range known. Even if such a hit were
got, the ordinary fuse would not act on encountering the slight
resistance of the balloon envelope. As regards the equipment, the
absorption of recoil at high elevations presents difficulties, the
exaggeration of the angle of sight makes the sighting arrangements
complicated, and rapidity in changing the line of fire is essential.
The most powerful equipment that, in June 1910, had been constructed
to meet these conditions was the Krupp 75 mm., which is mounted
on a motor lorry, the weight of the equipment and carriage, without
gunners, being about 4¼ tons. The equipment is constructed on the
differential recoil principle, with rear trunnions on the cradle. The
shell is a 12 lb H.E., fitted with a highly sensitive fuse and containing,
beside the H.E. burster, a quantity of composition which
gives off a trail of smoke to facilitate ranging.

«I»The British 18-pr. Q.F. Field Gun«/I» («I»1905«/I») (see Plate III., figs. 60
and 61; also «LN:Artillery|Artillery«/LN», Plate II.).—Taking fig. 60 from the top,
we see the buffer, telescopic spring-case and springs on top of the
cradle, the buffer being attached to the horn projecting upwards
from the breech. The cradle, of bronze, surrounds the gun, and is
pivoted on horizontal trunnions on the upper carriage. The gun
recoils in the cradle on the guide ribs, which extend for its whole
length. The upper carriage is pivoted vertically on the trail and is
traversed by the handle seen below the breech. The long elevating
screw is formed as a telescopic screw at its lower end to avoid any
downward projection; the screw does not turn, but the nut at
bottom raises the gun, screw and sights for laying, while the nut at
top raises and lowers the gun alone for giving elevation. The
tubular trail supports the brake-arms, which also carry the seats for
the layer and elevating number. The spade and traversing hand-spike
are seen at the end of the trail. The telescopic sight is on the
left of the gun. The shield is curved well back to give as much
protection as possible to the detachment. The lower portion of the
shield is hinged and folds up for travelling.

«I»The French Q.F. Field Gun«/I» («I»1898«/I») (fig. 62, Plate III.; see also
«LN:Artillery|Artillery«/LN», Plate II.).—This is a powerful gun, of unusual length,
namely 36 calibres. The breech mechanism is of the eccentric screw
type (see Part I. of this article). The gun has compressed-air running-up
gear and traverses along the axletree. The carriage is anchored
by a trail spade and two brake-blocks which are arranged so as to
go under the wheels, forming dragshoes, on firing. This method of
anchoring causes some delay on coming into action and considerable
delay in changing on to a fresh target. The gun has a goniometric
sight with independent line of sight. The body of the ammunition
wagon is tilted alongside the gun, and, with its armoured bottom
and steel doors, forms a good protection for the gunners supplying
ammunition.

«I»The German Q.F. Field Gun«/I» («I»1906«/I») (fig. 63).—This is the 1896 gun
remounted on a Q.F. carriage. It is not a powerful gun, the ballistics
being the same as those of the British 15-pr. B.L. of 1893. It has a
single-motion wedge breech action. The gun is mounted on a cradle
with buffer and springs under the gun; the cradle traverses on a
vertical pivot set in a traversing bed which turns about the axletree.
The gun has an arc sight with prismatic telescope and a clinometer
mounted on it, and a circular laying-plane for laying on an auxiliary
mark. It has not the independent line of sight. The shield is in
three pieces, the top flap folding down for travelling. The carriage
stands perfectly steady on discharge.

«I»The Russian Q.F. Field Gun«/I» («I»1903«/I») is intended as an improvement
on the French gun, being of even greater power. Springs are used
for running-up instead of compressed air. To ensure steadiness the
gun is kept very low on the carriage; this is effected by the use ofPAGE:252a cranked axletree. The gun has not the independent line of sight,
but has a panorama sight. It traverses on the axletree.

«I»The Danish Q.F. Field Gun«/I» (fig. 64, Plate IV.) is a good example
of the heavier or more powerful type of Krupp field gun. The gun
may be seen supported on the cradle, which contains the hydraulic
buffer and running-up springs. The wedge breech-block is open.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 63.png|width=800}}</td></tr><tr><td>«FS[85%]»Redrawn from Bethell’s «I»Modern Guns and Gunnery«/I».«/FS»</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:center">«SC»Fig«/SC». 63.—The German Q.F. Gun. C. 96. n./A. (1906).</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
The arc sight with panorama telescope is seen behind the shield,
which is curved backwards for better protection. The seats for the
gunners who lay and attend to the breech are on either side of the
trail. At the point of the trail are the spade, the traversing lever
and the trail eye by which the gun is limbered up.

«I»The American Q.F. Field Gun«/I».—This is an example of the Ehrhardt
type of gun. It is considerably more powerful than the field guns
adopted by most European powers. Steadiness is ensured by making
the trail 10½ ft. long, or 1¾ ft. longer than the Krupp trail. The
construction is otherwise very similar to that of the Krupp gun
shown in fig. 64, Plate IV. Four rounds are carried in tubes on the
carriage.

«I»Other Q.F. Equipments«/I».—These closely resemble the standard
types of their makers, as given in the above table of field guns. The
Swiss and Dutch guns are light Krupps; the Spanish and Portuguese
guns, by Schneider of Creusot, are improved and lighter models of
the French gun.

The new Italian gun is a medium Krupp. The Austrian gun is
similar to the American (Ehrhardt) but the gun itself is of bronze.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 65.png|width=800}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 65.—Rumanian (Krupp) Quick-Firing Field Gun.«/CTR»

The Rumanian Q.F. field gun (fig. 65) is a recent type of medium
Krupp gun. The shield is set well back, and has a hood projecting
forwards and fitting close to the gun. The brake is used for travelling
only; the brake-wheel is seen in front of the shield. The panorama
telescope is mounted on top of the arc sight; no foresight is used.
There are no axletree seats, the gunners being carried on the gun
limber and wagon limber. The wagon body (fig. 66) is tipped beside
the gun in action.

«I»Horse Artillery Guns«/I».—A horse artillery gun must be mobile
enough to accompany cavalry. This is secured partly by the
adoption of a light type of gun, partly by carrying the gunners on
horseback instead of on the carriage. It is considered that the
weight behind the team should not exceed 30 cwt. The Germans
have declined to introduce a special type of light gun, as they
object to the complication entailed by the supply of two natures
of ammunition on the battlefield. The H.A. guns of other
nations are merely lighter and less powerful editions of their field
guns.

«I»The Q.F. Field Howitzer«/I».—A field howitzer is a gun capable of
throwing a shell weighing 35 to 45 lb at high angles of elevation, and
light enough to manoeuvre at a trot across open country. The
permissible weight of the equipment is but slightly greater than
that of a field gun. The object of the howitzer is to throw a heavy,
shell with an angle of descent of not less than 25°, so as to destroy|
overhead cover with high-explosive shell, and to search entrenchments
and reach gunners behind their gun-shields with shrapnel.
Effect is obtained, not by the striking velocity of the shell, but by,
the amount of its high-explosive burster, or, in the case of shrapnel
fire, by the use of a large driving charge in the base of the shell
which gives the necessary forward and downward velocity to the
bullets.

Since the muzzle energy of a howitzer is limited by the weight of
the equipment, the heavy shell can only be fired with a low velocity,
usually not exceeding 1000 ft. per second. And in order to secure
a steep angle of descent at short ranges this velocity is still further
reduced by using half and quarter charges.

The construction of the howitzer is much the same as that of a
gun. The calibre is usually between 4·3 and 4·7 in., and the length
does not much exceed 12 calibres. Case ammunition is used, and
the breech action is similar to that of a Q.F. gun. Howitzers are
usually provided with shields in order to enable them to come intoPAGE:253action in the open when necessary. At short ranges, with full charge, they make very powerful guns.

«I»Construction of the Carriage«/I».—The gun-recoil system is used as in a gun equipment. There is however one important difference. If the recoil allowed be sufficient to keep the carriage steady at low elevations, then when fired at an elevation of 45° the breech will strike the ground. This may be to some extent avoided by placing
the trunnions of the cradle which supports the howitzer at the extreme rear end, so that when elevated the breech of the howitzer is not brought any nearer the ground (Krupp). One objection to
this is that the forward preponderance of the howitzer has to be
balanced by a spring to enable it to be elevated.

A second method is known as controlled recoil. The buffer-liquid,
on recoil, has to pass through holes in the piston. The access of the
buffer-liquid to these holes is controlled by a disk valve rotated by
rifled grooves in the cylinder. By connecting the piston-rod to the
carriage so as to rotate the piston when the gun is elevated, the
area of the holes exposed by the disk valve can be decreased at high
elevations so as to shorten the recoil. This is known as the Vavasseur-Ehrhardt
control valve. Messrs Cockerill use a channel through
which the liquid is forced on recoil, which is partly closed by a stopcock
connected to the left trunnion when the howitzer is elevated.
The running-up springs require to be strong in order to lift the
weight of the howitzer at 45° elevation. In most equipments twin
columns of springs are used.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 66.png|width=474}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 66.—Wagon Body, Rumanian (Krupp) Quick-firing Field Gun.«/CTR»

«I»The Ehrhardt Q.F. Field Howitzer«/I», fig. 67 (Plate IV.), may be taken
as a type of the light field howitzer with controlled recoil, as opposed
to the Krupp pattern with rear trunnions and constant long recoil.
The howitzer is represented immediately after firing, before it has
run up. The recoil is automatically shortened so that when fired at
this high elevation the buffer, which is seen under the breech, does
not strike the ground. The sights are on the bar which passes through
the shield. The calibre is 4·7 in.; the howitzer fires a 46 lb shell
with M.V. 985 f.s., and weighs 25 cwt. in action with shield.

«I»The Q.F. Mountain Gun«/I».—A mountain gun has the same tactical
duties to fulfil as a field gun. It is merely a field gun sufficiently
mobile for mountain transport. Its weight and dimensions are
restricted by the following considerations: (1) The whole equipment
has to be carried on pack animals. (2) The average load for
a battery mule is about 280 lb, including 65 lb of saddle and equipment.
A few specially selected gun-mules can carry about 40 lb
more, or 320 lb. In Spain and Italy, where exceptionally fine mules
are available, some of the mountain battery loads amount to 375 lb.
(3) The loads must be short, the length being limited by that of the
neck of a mule. If possible no part of the equipment should be more
than 4′ 6″ long. (4) The equipment must, therefore, be subdivided
into component parts such that no part weighs more than 320—65
or 255 lb, and these parts must be so designed as to be quickly assembled.
(5) The number of parts into which the equipment may
be subdivided is either four or five. British mountain batteries
have five gun and carriage mules, and yet they come into action and
fire the first round within one minute. Other nations mostly divide
the equipment into four parts only, and use rather heavier loads
than is in England considered consistent with activity on a hillside
(6) Mountain guns are usually provided with shafts to enable them
to be drawn instead of being carried when travelling along a road.

On a 5-mule basis the total weight of gun and carriage carried
amounts to 10¼ cwt. or more than half the weight of a field gun.
But the power obtainable is not commensurate, being in practice
limited by the weight of the gun itself, which is restricted by the
carrying power of the transport animals. In B.L. mountain equipments
this difficulty has been got over by carrying the gun in two
parts, which are screwed together on coming into action.

In the British service the 7 pr. R.M.L. of 400 lb, the original
“screw gun,” was superseded in 1900 by the 10 pr. B.L., also in
two pieces. A quick-firing mountain gun has since been introduced
(1907).

In modern mountain equipments, such as the Schneider-Danglis
gun adopted by Russia, the gun is not divided across the bore but is
lightened for transport by removing the breech-piece and breech-block,
which are carried separately. These guns fire a shell of 14·3 lb
with M.V. of 1100 f.s.

When the gun is in one piece, the equipment naturally divides
itself into four parts, namely the gun, cradle, trail and axletree and
wheels. When a long jointed trail is used, as in the Krupp Q.F.
mountain equipment, the point of the trail is carried with the
wheels, which form a light load. In addition to this the folding
shield with ammunition forms a fifth load. The shield need not,
however, be brought up till after the gun has opened fire.

Since the length of a mountain gun in one piece may not exceed
4 ft. 6 in., the calibre has to be comparatively large to get the necessary
power, and is usually 75 mm. or 3 in. The weight may not
exceed 255 lb. A short breech action such as the swinging block or
the eccentric screw is preferred. The sights must be of simple
pattern; the independent line of sight is too complicated for mountain
work. But it is most desirable that the sight-socket should be
capable of being cross-levelled to eliminate the error introduced by
difference of level of wheels. Except in the French gun, the recoil
gear and running-up springs are similar to those used
in Q.F. field guns. In the Krupp mountain equipment
the gun does not slide directly on the cradle
guides, but a steel forging called a sleigh is interposed.
This forms a sliding cover to the cradle, and
protects the guides. On coming into action the gun
is dropped into the sleigh and secured by a keyed lug.
The trail of a Q.F. mountain gun has to be from 6 ft.
to 7 ft. long to keep the gun steady. It is either carried
in two pieces (Krupp) or is hinged and folded (Ehrhardt).
The spade is similar to that used with field guns. The
wheels are of wood, about 3 ft. in diameter. The
elevating gear is a plain screw. The gun and cradle
traverse on a vertical pivot about 3 degrees each way.
A shield high enough to protect the gunners kneeling
weighs up to 1 cwt., and is carried in two pieces.

The Krupp mountain gun, fig. 68 (Plate IV.),
may be taken as an example of ordinary practice.
The gun is seen mounted on the sleigh, which
slides to the rear on the cradle when the gun
recoils. The cradle is pivoted vertically on a saddle
mounted on horizontal trunnions between the trail
brackets; the rearward extension of the saddle
forms the traversing bed and is supported by the
elevating screw. The foresight and arc sight are
attached to the cradle. Near the middle of the
7-ft. trail are seen the seats for the laying and
loading numbers. The trail is divided immediately
in rear of the seats. The calibre is 2·95 in., the
gun fires a shell weighing 11 lb 10 oz. with a muzzle velocity of
920 f.s. The weight in action is 820 lb, without shield.

The French 1907 mountain gun differs markedly from other
types in that the carriage is constructed with differential recoil
gear as described above. There is no hydraulic buffer, and the
whole of the recoil-energy is absorbed by the springs. The gun is
held in the recoil position by a catch, and when loaded and released
it is fired automatically by a tripper on the cradle. The calibre is
2·65 in., and the shell weighs 11 lb 10 oz.

«SC»Authorities«/SC».—H. A. Bethell, «I»Modern Guns and Gunnery«/I» (Woolwich,
1907, 3rd edition, 1910); Kenyon, «I»F.A. Material on the Continent«/I»
(R.A. Institution, Woolwich, 1905); Greenhill, “The
Dynamics of Gun Recoil,” «I»The Engineer«/I» (23rd August 1907); v.
Roskoten, «I»Moderne Feldkanonen«/I» (Oldenburg, 1906); Rohne, «I»Progrès«/I»
«I»de l’artillerie de campagne moderne«/I» (Paris, 1906), Challéat, «I»Théorie des«/I»
«I»affûts à deformation«/I» (Paris, 1906), Siacci, «I»Balistique extérieure«/I»;
Witzleben, «I»Feldgeschützfrage in Portugal«/I» (Dresden, 1906); Castner,
“Development of Recoil Apparatus,” «I»Journal U.S. Artillery«/I» (1904);
and «I»Der Erfolg des stdndigen Rohrn'icklaufs bei Feldhaubitzen«/I»
(Frauenfeld, 1906); v. Reichenau, «I»Munitionsausrüstung«/I» (Berlin,
1905). «I»Shrapnels et boucliers«/I» and «I»L’Obusier de campagne moderne«/I»
(Lucerne, 1906), Bahn. «I»Die Entwicklung der Rohrrücklauf-Feldhaubitze«/I»
(Berlin, 1907), 

«CTR»«SC»III. Heavy Field and Siege Equipments«/SC»«/CTR»

«I»Heavy Field Batteries«/I».—Since the days of Gujrat and Inkermann
the value of heavy metal in the field has been recognized,
at all events in theory, but it was mainly due to the South African
war that “heavy” batteries have become a component part of
modern armies. Guns heavier than field guns have formed
part of the equipment of the Indian army for many years.PAGE:254but they have existed for a specific purpose, and ordnance
originally designed for quite other functions has, from the
exigencies of war, been occasionally utilized in the field, as was
the case in South Africa and Manchuria, but the heavy field
battery as we know it to-day is a new military product. Its
rôle is an extensive one, as it embraces many of the functions of
ordinary field guns as well as some of those usually attributed to
fight siege pieces. In the heavy field armaments of the Powers as
they stand at the present time will be found guns, howitzers and
mortars, and projectiles that vary from 50 lb to more than five
times that weight, and no boundary line can be assigned which
will separate these field equipments from those of the light units
of a siege train It will be convenient to consider in turn the
three natures of ordnance (guns, howitzers and mortars) employed
and to quote some typical instances of each kind.

«I»The United States 60 pr. Gun«/I».—This gun and its equipment are
of modern type (1904) Its general appearance is shown in figs. 69
and 70, Plate V. The calibre is 4·7″; the charge 5·94 lb
of smokeless powder and the muzzle velocity developed
is 1700 f.s. Fixed ammunition is employed, and with an elevation
of 15° the range is 7600 yds. The weight of the equipment limbered «SH»Guns.«/SH» up is given as 712/7 cwt.: it is known as a siege gun.

In its general aspect the carriage resembles a field carriage, but of
stronger type, with a special arrangement of cradle.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable"><tr><td colspan="6">{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 71.png|width=400}}</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">«FS[85%]»From Lieut.-Colonel Ormond M. Lissak’s «I»Ordnance and Gunnery«/I».«/FS»«BR»

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 71.—Diagram of 4·7-in. Siege Gun, U.S.A.«/CTR»</td></tr><tr><td>«I»b«/I»,</td><td>Traversing bracket,</td><td>«I»r«/I»,</td><td>Rails.</td><td>«I»x«/I»,</td><td>Axle.</td></tr><tr><td>«I»p«/I».</td><td>Pintle bearing.</td><td>«I»s«/I».</td><td>Spring cylinders,</td><td>«I»y«/I»,</td><td>Pintle yoke.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
In fig. 71 two sections are given; the cradle, it will be seen,
consists of three cylinders (seen in section in the upper figure) which
are bound together by broad steel bands; the two outer cylinders
carry rails «I»r«/I» upon which the gun slides in recoil. The centre cylinder
contains the hydraulic gear for checking recoil, the two outer contain
the running-up springs «I»s«/I». These springs are arranged in three concentric
columns, the front end of each outer column being connected
to the rear end of the next inner column by a steel tube,
flanged outwardly at the front end and inwardly at the rear end.
A rod carrying a head which acts on the inner coil only passes
through the centre of the cylinder and is fixed to a yoke that is
connected with a lug at the breech of the gun. The flanged tubes
thus convey the pressure from the innermost coil to the next outer
coil and finally to the outermost coil, so that in each cylinder the
springs work in tandem and have a long stroke with short assembled
length. It is thus seen the recoil takes place partially on the carriage
and only a portion of the energy remains to tend to cause movement
in the mounting.

The cradle is supported by trunnions in the casting «I»y«/I», which is
itself seated in the casting «I»p«/I», which forms a bearing for it. This
bearing is mounted between the front ends of the trail brackets, its
rear end embracing the hollow axle «I»x«/I». Attached to the lower surface
of «I»y«/I» is the traversing bracket «I»b«/I», which extends to the rear under
the axle and forms a support for the traversing shaft «I»t«/I» and for the
elevating mechanism.

For travelling (Plate V., fig. 69) the gun is withdrawn to the rear
and the breech is attached to a holding-down arrangement about
the middle of the trail. A spade is hinged at the point of the trail.

«I»The British 60 pr. Gun«/I».—This is known as a heavy battery gun;
its calibre is 5″, its length 32 calibres, its weight 39 cwt.; its charge
is 97/16 lb of cordite, its muzzle velocity 2080 f.s. and its effective
shrapnel range 10,000 yds. The weight behind the team is 106 cwts.,
3 qrs.

«I»The German 10 cm. Gun«/I» is called a heavy battery gun; its calibre
is 4″, its effective shrapnel range is 5750 yds., but common shell can
be used up to 11,000 yds. The organization is a six-gun battery,
but a platform has always to be used.

A howitzer is a comparatively light piece that fires a comparatively
heavy shell with a comparatively low muzzle velocity, and changes
in range are effected sometimes by alteration of charge
as well as of elevation. On the continent of Europe
howitzers are more popular than guns for heavy field batteries
and light siege units. «SH»Howitzers.«/SH» 
«I»The French 15 cm«/I». («I»Rimailho«/I») «I»Howitzer«/I».—This piece is at the
present time very popular in France, where, in 1907, some 120 batteries
of the field army were said to be armed with it. It came into
being from the conversion of an old pattern siege howitzer and its
adaptation to a new form of carriage, according to the plans of
Commandant Rimailho. The gun («I»canon de 155 R«/I») is a short piece,
made of steel, with a calibre of 6·1″; the shell weighs about 94 tb
and has an effective range of 7000 yds. The breech opens automatically
after each round and a rapidity of fire of from 4 to 5
rounds a minute is claimed. The howitzer is supported on two
trunnions near its rear end so that the weight pivots about a point
near the breech, with the result that the latter remains nearly 5 ft.
above the ground level at all angles of elevation; space is thus left
for recoil, which is checked by a buffer, the construction of which is
a secret; running-out springs are provided to return the gun to the
firing position. The piece recoils in a cradle to which is attached
the elevation scale, but the elevating gear is independent of the
carriage proper; the line of sight is also independent. The howitzer
has a special transporting carriage, but it can be placed on its firing
carriage, it is said, in two minutes. The weight behind the teams is
in each case about 47 cwt. On a war footing three ammunition
wagons per howitzer would be provided.

«I»The German 75 cm. Howitzer.«/I»—The Germans also possess a 15 cm.
howitzer of modern type; its rate of fire is 2 to 3 rounds a minute;
its shell is 87½ lb in weight and the weight behind the team is about
53 cwt.

«I»The British 6«/I»″ «I»B.L. Howitzer.«/I»—This piece is made of steel, it
weighs 30 cwt., its shell weighs 122 lb and has an effective range of
7000 yds. The weight behind the team is 85 cwt.

Fig. 72 shows the howitzer and cradle A mounted on the travelling
carriage, from which it can be fired up to an angle of 35°: in fig. 73
the wheels have been removed, the trail B has been lowered on to
the pivot plate C and secured to a pivot plug screwed into the
plate: to the trail is fitted the top carriage D, and when the howitzer
and cradle are thus mounted 70° elevation can be given.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 72.png|width=350}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 72.—Diagram, of British 6-in. B.L. Howitzer.«/CTR»

The
howitzer recoils through the cradle, in which are two hydraulic
buffers side by side, fig. 74, whose piston rods E are attached to the
howitzer so that the recoil of the latter draws the pistons J to the
rear. Consider now, in fig. 74, the right buffer only; forged in one
piece with the piston and piston rod is a tail rod F of larger diameter
than the piston rod, and in the front of the cylinder is an annular
bronze casting G, called a floating piston, which bears against the
rear of the springs. On discharge, the howitzer slides along the
cradle to the rear, the piston rod E is drawn out of the cylinder
and the tail rod F is drawn in, and from its larger diameter causes
a pressure of oil against the floating piston G, which slides forward
and compresses the springs which are prevented moving by the
rods H. The action is the same in each buffer. After recoil the
springs expand and return the howitzer into the firing position.PAGE:255The floating pistons are tapered slightly inside towards the front
to prevent violence in the running out action. The elevating gear,
which can be placed on the left side of either the trail or the top
carriage, actuates the arc K, bolted to the left side of the cradle.
When the gun is fired on wheels (fig. 72) an anchorage buffer M,
attached to the platform, checks the recoil, whilst the springs with
which it is provided cause the carriage to return to its position.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 73.png|width=350}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 73.—Diagram of British 6-in. B.L. Howitzer«BR»
(70° elevation).«/CTR»

«I»The United States 6«/I» ″ «I»Howitzer«/I».—This is a more modern equipment,
its date being 1905. The howitzer is a short piece, 13 calibres long;
it fires a 120-lb shell with a muzzle velocity of 900 f.s. It has an
extreme elevation of 45° and an effective range of 7000 yds. The
weight behind the team is 705 cwt. The carriage is of peculiar
construction (fig. 75). The howitzer is supported under its cradle,
which is carried on trunnions seated in the top carriage. The
cradle consists of three cylinders generally similar in arrangement
and in functions to those described for the 4·7″ 60 pr. gun: the
howitzer is made in a single forging and carries a lug on its breech
end for the attachment of the recoil piston rod and the yoke for the
rods of the spring cylinders; flanged rails are formed on its upper
surface, which support it on its cradle. The top carriage rests on a
framework called a “pintle bearing.” Flanges in the former engage
under clips in the latter; the pintle bearing is riveted to the front
part of the trail brackets, and forms a turn-table upon which the top
carriage and all supported by it have a movement of 3° traverse on
either side.

This movement of traverse is effected by a shaft and worm: the
former is supported in a fixture attached to the left trail bracket,
and the latter works in a nut pivoted to the top carriage.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 74.png|width=420}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 74.—Hydraulic buffers of British 6-in. B.L. Howitzer.«BR»
(«I»N.B.«/I»—Spiral, instead of volute springs, are now used.)«/CTR»

Elevation is effected by a forging called the rocker. The rear
part of the latter is U-shaped and passes under the gun, being
attached to the cradle by a pivoted hook «I»k«/I». From either side of the
U arms extend which embrace the cradle trunnions between the
cradle and the cheeks of the top carriage so that the rocker can
rotate about the cradle trunnions. The elevating gear is supported
in lugs on the under side of the top carriage, while the upper end
of the elevating screw is attached to the bottom of the rocker. The
rocker thus moves in elevation in the top carriage and gives elevation
to the cradle, and therefore to the gun, by means of the pivoted
hook above referred to.

The brackets of the trail extend separately to the rear, sufficiently
providing for free movements of recoil at any elevation; they are
then joined by transoms and top and bottom plates and terminate
in a detachable spade which is secured to the top of the trail in
travelling. The axle is of special shape to admit of the movements
of the cradle; it is lower in the middle than at the sides and is
made in three parts, held together by shrinkage in cylinders formed
in the sides of the pintle bearing.

A peculiarity of this carriage is that recoil is automatically
shortened as elevation increases. Thus the length of recoil is 50″
at angles of firing from −5° to 0°, from 0° to 25° the 50″ is gradually
reduced to 28″, which is not changed for higher angles. This is
effected as follows: Four apertures are made in the piston of the
recoil cylinder and there are two longitudinal throttling grooves
in the walls of the cylinder. All apertures being open and deepest
part of grooves in use would correspond to a 50″ recoil; apertures
closed and grooves alone at work would mean a 28″ recoil. A
rotating disk with apertures similar and similarly placed to those
on the piston is carried by the piston rod and rests against the
front of the piston, and is actuated during recoil by two lugs projecting
into helical guide slots cut in the walls of the recoil cylinder.
The latter is mounted so as to be capable of rotation in the cradle,
and its outer surface carries teeth which engage with similar teeth in
a ring surrounding the right spring cylinder. When the elevation is
between 0° and 25° these latter teeth engage in special gearing which
is seated in the hollow trunnion of the cradle and is attached to the
right cheek of the top carriage. The buffer conditions are thus
made to correspond with the elevation.

The mortar is a short piece of ordnance that is always fired from
a bed. Changes in range are usually effected by varying 
the charge. «SH»Mortars.«/SH» 
«I»United States 3·6«/I» ″ «I»Mortar«/I».—This equipment is not modern; the
piece was intended for vertical fire against troops in entrenchments;
the mortar weighs 245 lb, and its bed, which is made in a single
casting of steel, 300 lb. The latter rests in action on a wooden platform
and is held down by ropes and pickets.

«I»The German 8·4«/I» ″ «I»Mortar«/I».—This equipment is perhaps the heaviest
field equipment existing. The mortar in action weighs about 4·9 tons;
it has to be transported in a special vehicle and can only be
fired from a platform; four hours are required for bringing it into
action. Two platform wagons are attached to each mortar, weighing
respectively 2·9 and 4·9 tons. The equipment can be moved at a
walk on good roads, but two companies of infantry are always
attached for haulage in case of need. A battery consists of 4 mortars,
and 160 rounds are carried. The shell weighs 250 lb and carries a
heavy charge of high explosive, with or without delay action fuze.

A special equipment designed by Messrs Krupp is shown in Plate
vi., figs. 76 and 77. It is a mobile mounting for an 8·26″ mortar
with constant long recoil, which is fired, like a howitzer, from its
travelling carriage without a platform. This equipment weighs about
5 tons in action.

All the foregoing equipments may be considered «I»mobile«/I»; that is
to say, the batteries in which they are organized are self-contained,
can move from place to place without external assistance, and may
be employed on either field or siege duties. Their uses may be
summed up as follows: The first object of the heavy artillery
accompanying an army is to demolish the barrier forts or other
frontier fortifications of a permanent nature in order to enable the
army to penetrate into the enemy’s country. After this has been
done, a small portion of this artillery will be employed in connexion
with the siege of fortresses, while another, by far the more considerable
portion, will accompany the advance of the field army.

«I»Heavy Siege Units«/I».—When a serious siege has to be undertaken
it is necessary to organize one or more siege trains in
addition to the troops of the field army. Both heavy and light
siege units enter into the composition of a siege train. As to
the armament of the latter, we have said that it is not
exactly distinguishable from that of heavy field batteries,
and it has already been described. That of the former is
less definite. Heavy siege units are seldom mobile in the
sense that light siege units are: the ordnance comprising
the former has usually to be transported by some special
means; thus it might be conveyed by ordinary rail or ship
to some place from which special siege railways would admit
of its conveyance to its place in battery, and probably great
variety of calibre and mounting would exist. For example,
during the siege of Sevastopol a civil engineer, Robert
Mallet (1810–1881), designed a 36″ mortar; it did not, however,
reach the seat of war; and in 1904 the Japanese made
use of their 11·1″ coast howitzers at Port Arthur. At the siege
manoeuvres in France in 1906 the heavy siege units were represented
by their 6·1″ gun and their 10·7″ howitzer. The official
British pieces are a 6″ gun and a 9·4″ howitzer. Generally
speaking, whereas the most suitable armament of the light units
can as a rule be foreseen, that of the heavy would depend very
much on circumstances.PAGE:256«I»The French 10·7«/I» ″ «I»Howitzer«/I».—As a typical piece the 10·7″ howitzer
may be taken, which the French transported by special horse
draught, as it was found too heavy for the type of siege railway
made use of at the mock siege of Langres in 1907. Its total equipment
weighs 22 tons and it is transported in four components,
namely, the piece, the carriage, the slide and the platform. A
battery of six pieces would thus require, exclusive of ammunition
transport, 24 vehicles that would weigh 130 tons. The howitzer
was designed originally for coast defence; it weighs about 5¾ tons
and its bed weighed 6⅓ tons: to this equipment was added a slide
and a platform, consisting of a thick plate of iron upon which
the slide moves. The platform is provided with a pivot upon which
the front part of the slide fits. The latter consists of an iron framework,
having lateral movement around the aforesaid pivot; its
rear portion is provided with rollers to facilitate its movement on
the platform. Its upper portion consists of two inclined rails along
which the bed or carriage of the howitzer slides. To check recoil a
hydraulic buffer is attached to the front of the slide and also to the
bed.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable"><tr><td colspan="4">{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 75.png|width=580}}</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">«FS[85%]»From Lieut.-Colonel Ormond M. Lissak’s «I»Ordnance and Gunnery«/I».«/FS»</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4" style="text-align:center">«SC»Fig«/SC». 75.—Diagram of 6-in. Siege Howitzer, U.S.A.</td></tr><tr><td>«I»b«/I»,</td><td>Hand-wheel actuating wheel</td><td>«I»k«/I»,</td><td>Hook, 1, 2, 3, 4 and mechanism</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>brakes.</td><td></td><td>for loading position.</td></tr><tr><td>«I»e«/I».</td><td>Elevating hand-wheel.</td><td>«I»n«/I»,</td><td>Elevating screw.</td></tr><tr><td>«I»h«/I»,</td><td>Handle.</td><td>«I»t«/I».</td><td>Traversing wheel.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
The fighting units of siege artillery in the British service are
companies and brigades; each company would be armed with
from 4 to 6 light siege pieces or from 2 to 4 heavy pieces. A company
is usually a major’s command. Three such companies would
form a siege brigade under a lieutenant-colonel. If a siege train of
any magnitude were organized it might
be necessary to combine two or more
brigades into a division under a colonel
or brigadier. In the French service
each siege train consists of three divisions.
A division is divided into groups
and comprises some 50 pieces of ordnance,
heavy and light. 

«CTR»«SC»IV. Garrison Mountings«/SC»«/CTR»

The armament of modern coast
fronts consists of («I»a«/I») heavy B.L. guns,
9″ and upwards; («I»b«/I») medium guns,
4″ and upwards, and («I»c«/I») light Q.F.
guns; all these being for direct fire;
and («I»d«/I») guns, howitzers or mortars of
various calibres for high angle fire.
Typical guns of type («I»a«/I») are the Krupp
12″ gun and the British 9·2 B.L. gun.
The Krupp 12″ gun is built up of
crucible cast nickel steel, not wire
wound. It is 45 calibres long and
has the Krupp wedge-shaped breech-closing
apparatus. It is fitted with
a repeating trip lock. The cartridge
is a metallic case containing a charge
of 290 lb of tubular powder. The projectiles are of two
weights, 770 lb and 980 lb, and the respective muzzle
velocities are 3025 f.s. and 2700 f.s. The British 9·2 B.L. gun
is of wire-wound construction and is over 48 calibres long.
It has the asbestos pad and Welin screw system of obturation,
and its charge of 103 lb of cordite, contained in a cartridge of
silk cloth, fires a 380 lb projectile with a muzzle velocity of
2643 f.s. A typical gun of class («I»b«/I») is the British 6″ mark VII.
It is similar in construction and breech mechanism to the last-named
and fires a 100 lb projectile with a charge of 23 lb cordite,
giving a muzzle velocity of 2493 f.s. A typical gun of class («I»c«/I»)
is the British 12 pr. Q.F.; its weight is 12½cwt., it is made of
steel, is 10·3 calibres long, and with a cordite charge of 1 lb 15 oz.
it fires a projectile 12½ lb in weight with a muzzle velocity of
2197 f.s. and a possible rate of 15 aimed rounds a minute. A
typical piece of class («I»d«/I») is the 11″ Krupp howitzer. It is 12
calibres long, has a charge of 28½ lb smokeless powder and fires
steel shell weighing 470 lb or 760 lb. It is provided with a
shrapnel shell of the former weight which contains 1880
bullets.

The methods of mounting of coast ordnance are many; space
only permits of referring to certain typical arrangements.

1. «I»The Moncrieff Principle«/I».—The disappearing carriage originated,
at all events in England, with Colonel Sir A. Moncrieff, who, about
1864, proposed to utilize the energy of recoil to bring a
gun into a protected position and at the same time to
store up sufficient energy to raise it to a firing position when
loading was completed. To effect this a heavy counterweight «SH»Disappearing mountings.«/SH» was so adjusted that its tendency was to raise the
gun; when the latter was fired, it raised the counterweight and a
ratchet and pawl followed the action up: when the pawl was released
the counterweight brought the gun back to the firing position;
this application of the principle had many drawbacks, and never
had any success with guns over 7 tons in weight. It was not until
Moncrieff invented the hydropneumatic appliances that any real
progress was made. In 1888 was introduced into the British service
the first of a large group of disappearing mountings for guns of types
(«I»a«/I») and («I»b«/I»). where the energy of recoil was absorbed chiefly by forcing
a large volume of liquid through a narrow opening or recoil valve,
and also by further compressing a large volume of already highly
compressed air; when recoil was completed the recoil valve closed and the air was retained at very high pressure: the energy thus stored up returned the gun to the firing position. The action will be understood from the following example.

«I»The British 6«/I» ″ «I»B.L. Gun on H.P. Mounting«/I», «I»Mark IV«/I».—Fig. 78 shows a general view of the mounting; fig. 79 is a vertical andPAGE:257{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0257_63912a13.jpg}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 78.—British 6″ B.L. Gun on H.P. Mounting, Mark IV.«/CTR»

fig. 80 a transverse section through the recoil cylinder. The gun
trunnions (fig. 78) are supported by the two arms of the elevator A,
which is pivoted to the front of the lower carriage at B. The breech
is supported by the two elevating bars C whose lower ends are
attached to the elevating arcs D. These arcs are worked by the
elevating gear actuated by the hand-wheel E. The arcs are struck
with the bars C as radii, their centres being points at the upper
end of the bars when the gun is in the loading position. Elevation
can thus be given to the gun whilst it is being loaded. The lower
carriage rests on a ring of live rollers G, which are free to traverse
round on a circular racer H, motion being given by traversing gear
actuated by the hand-wheel I. Supported by vertical stanchions
attached to the lower carriage is a horizontal circular shield J
through which the gun rises to the firing position. The manganese
bronze ram F which is attached to the elevators A by the cross-head
L is forced on recoil into the central chamber of the recoil cylinder
(see fig. 79), which is supported by trunnions M resting in the brackets
of the lower carriage. There are ten chambers N (figs. 79 and 80),
all of which are connected at the bottom with the recoil valve
chamber O, and consequently with each other. Nine of these
contain liquid in their lower portions and highly compressed air
above, and are connected at the top by a channel P to equalize the
pressure in each chamber. The tenth chamber N′, which is situated
lowest in the cylinder, contains liquid alone and has at its uppier end
the raising valve Q. On recoil the liquid in the central chamber is
forced by the ram through the recoil valve R into the outer chambers
N, thus further compressing the air. As R is a non-return valve the
air is maintained in this highly compressed state during loading.
The gun is raised by pushing the lever S (fig. 78) to the front which
actuates the rack T (fig. 79), thus opening Q, which allows the air
in the nine chambers to force liquid from the tenth chamber N
into the centre ram chamber, lifting the ram. U is a pump (fig. 79)
by which the gun can be pumped down at drill. The liquid employed
in the buffer is a mixture of methylated spirits, mineral oil, distilled
water and carbonate of soda, and its aeration, due to the churning
it receives on recoil, is a serious drawback to this class of mounting.
From a 6″ B.L. gun mounted in this fashion somewhat more than
one aimed round a minute can be obtained; from a 9·2″ B.L. about
four such rounds in five minutes.

The foregoing description is now, however, principally interesting
as showing an ingenious application of mechanical principles for
military purposes. Mountings of this type are being gradually
withdrawn from the British service.

«I»The Buffington-Crozier Principle«/I».—In the United States a type of
disappearing carriage known as the Buffington-Crozier (fig. 81) is
used. Here, as in the earlier types of Moncrieff carriage, a counterweight
is employed, but the energy of recoil is partly absorbed by
a buffer, and the counterweight, which is constrained by guides to
move vertically up and down, is just able to raise the gun to the
firing position. A satisfactory
rate of fire is claimed for this
mounting, which has recently
been improved.

«I»Balanced Pillar«/I».—Another
type of disappearing mounting
for guns of type («I»b«/I») or («I»c«/I»),
known as the balanced pillar,
is found on the continent of
Europe and in the United
States, where it is used for 5″
guns and under. A long steel
cylinder, which supports the
gun and its carriage, has a
vertical movement of about
35 ft. in an outer cylinder.
The inner cylinder and all
that it carries is balanced by
a counterweight. After the
gun is fired it can be brought
with its length parallel to the
parapet.
{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0257_dbee2f95.jpg}}
:«SC»Fig«/SC». 79.—Vertical Section through Recoil Cylinder of Gun shown in fig. 78.

{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0257_3abee03d.jpg}}
:«SC»Fig«/SC». 80.—Transverse Section through Recoil Cylinder of Gun shown in fig. 78.

Then by the action
of the mechanism the inner
cylinder can be made to sink
in the outer cylinder and the gun is brought down to the loading
position; the release of the counterweight will cause it to
rise again. The gun has the usual motion of traverse round the
common axis of the two cylinders.PAGE:258{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0258_32394d3e.jpg}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 81.—Buffington-Crozier Disappearing Carriage for 10″ B.L. .Gun, U.S.A.«/CTR»

The heavy gun cupola is found on the continent of Europe in the
armaments of various Powers for guns of type («I»a«/I»), the German
practice being occasionally to mount two 11″ guns in the same cupola.
The cast-iron cupola was introduced by Gruson of Magdeburg,
but nickel steel is now generally employed by Krupp.
In Gruson’s design the gun and mounting are placed «SH»Cupolas.«/SH» upon a turn-table upon which also rest the bases of a series of cast-iron
plates; these are very massive, are curvilinear in section, and
are built up into a shallow dome which completely covers the
mountings as with a cap: the whole structure turns together, being
traversed round a central pivot. The chase of the gun emerges
through a port which admits of the necessary play of elevation.
A notable example of a cupola was erected at Spezzia containing
two 120-ton Krupp guns, the structure complete weighing 2050 tons.
A Krupp cupola of chilled cast-iron for two 28-cm. (11″) is shown
in fig. 82. These are designed principally for coast defence in low
sites. The cupola, which is built up like a Gruson cupola of several
heavy iron masses, is resolved and the guns laid by hydraulic power.
A heavy chilled cast-iron collar protects the under side of the
armoured structure and the working mechanism of the guns. Fig. 83,
Plate VI., represents a
Krupp mounting for
an 11·2″ howitzer, with
a cupola-like shield.
This is worked both
electrically and by
hand. Vertical fire
from a weapon of this
type is sufficiently
powerful to penetrate
the protective deck of
a vessel. Light and
medium guns, types
(«I»b«/I») and («I»c«/I»), are sometimes
mounted in
cupolas, especially on
land fronts (see below),
and disappearing
cupolas have also been
proposed for them:
in the latter the whole
structure is made to
sink by the action of
mechanism till the top
of the cupola is level
with the ground.
Types and further details
will be found in
the article «LN:Fortification and Siegecraft|Fortification and Siegecraft«/LN».

Mountings of the barbette type are much favoured in the British
service for guns of types («I»a«/I») and («I»b«/I»); one of the most
modern is shown in fig. 21, where a 9·2″ B.L. gun, Mark X.,
is placed upon a Mark V. mounting, a combination which
admits of over five aimed rounds in two minutes. «SH»Barbette mountings.«/SH» 

{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0258_ff8ed9a2.jpg}}

«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 82.—Krupp Cupola for two 28-cm. Guns.«/CTR»

«I»The British 9·2«/I»″ «I»B.L. Gun«/I».—Fig. 84 shows a general view of the
mounting, fig. 85 a longitudinal section through the cradle on a
larger scale. The gun, which is trunnionless, carries a cross-head A
and recoils in the cradle C, being supported by its guides D, which
slide in longitudinal grooves in the cradle. To this cross-head is
attached the buffer cylinder B (see fig. 85) which recoils with the
gun, while the piston rod L is attached to the front of the cradle:
engaging with the buffer cylinder and in the same axial line is a
bronze casting containing two air chambers F and G: the casting is
attached to the rear of the cradle, which is supported by trunnions
E in the lower carriage. Thus on firing, the gun carries the bufferPAGE:261cylinder backwards with it, draws it off its piston rod L and forces
it into the air chamber F. The air in the chambers F and G is at a
high initial tension and, on recoil, the air in F is further compressed
and forced through the valve H into the chamber G. At the conclusion
of recoil the air expands and forces the buffer cylinder to
the front, which carries with it the gun into its loading position;
but the valve H closes and the air has to make its way through a
narrow hole before it can act on the end of the buffer, thus preventing
violent action, which is further guarded against by the “control
ram” M which is bolted into the rear end of the buffer. To prevent
leakage of air between the air chamber and the buffer at the gland
K the packing employed is a viscous liquid which is in communication
by means of the pipe J with the intensifier I. The latter consists
of a cylinder containing a piston and rod free to move: the front
face of this piston is subject to the pressure of the air in the air
chamber, the rear face is in communication with the liquid in the
gland. Now, as the piston head is held in position by the pressures
on either side of it, and as the effective area of the front face is
greater than that of the rear—on account of the rod—the liquid
pressure per square inch of the fluid in the gland, &c., must be greater
than that of the air in the air chamber, hence the latter cannot
escape through the former. The pressure in the chambers F and G
is adjusted on preparing for action by an air pump worked by hand.
The energy of recoil is further utilized as follows: hydraulic
cylinders called compressors are held in the cradle, and in them
work rams connected with the cross-head A (sec fig. 85): they are
also connected with a hydraulic accumulator (not shown) which
can be placed in any convenient position in the work, and the power
thus stored up be employed for raising the projectiles, for which
purpose two lifts are provided. One of these (W) is in the floor of
the emplacement, the other (W) is attached to and moves with the
mounting. Underneath and suspended from the circular gun platform
RR, which forms a shield, is an overhead railway QQ, on which
run trollies, each taking a projectile. The projectiles are stored in
the recess shown in section at O. By means of a shell barrow any
projectile can be placed on the lift W and raised to a trolley which
can be run round over the lift W, which raises the projectile, as
shown at S, to a point suitable for loading.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 84.png|align=center|width=780}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SPAN[style:position:relative; bottom:2em]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 84.—British 9·2″ B.L. Gun, Mark X., on Barbette Mounting.«/SPAN»</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 85.png|width=540}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 85.—Details of Mounting shown in fig. 21.«/CTR»

«I»The British 6″ B.L. Gun«/I».—A typical mounting for guns of type
(«I»b«/I») is afforded by the British C.P. (central pivot), Mark II. mounting
for the 6″ B.L. Mark VII. gun, a combination which admits of six
rounds a minute aimed fire. Fig. 86 shows a side elevation cf the
mounting with half the shield removed; fig. 87 a longitudinal
section of part of the cradle through the axis of the buffer. The
gun, which is trunnionless, recoils in the cradle A; the latter contains
a buffer B and two cylindrical boxes containing springs S.
Attached to the breech of the gun is a piston rod C with piston D,
the latter having an opening or “port” E, through which the oil
passes on recoil, the pressure in the buffer, which would otherwise
vary with the velocity of the recoil, being kept constant by the
variation in the area of aperture afforded by E. This area is governed
by the action of the valve key strip F of varying section, which is
inserted in the buffer in such a way that as the gun recoils the port E
is constrained to pass over it. On recoil the rods J, which are
attached to the gun in rear and screwed into the flanged cylinder H
in front, force back the front of the springs S, whose rear ends butt
up against the rear of the spring boxes. After recoil the springs
return the gun to the firing position. To check the violence of this
action a control ram G is made use of: the
piston rod has a cylindrical hole in front
which, as the gun recoils, becomes filled
with oil, and before the piston can come
up against the front of the buffer this oil
has to be displaced by the thrust of the
ram G which checks the forward movement
of the gun. The cradle A rests on its
trunnions in seatings in the lower carriage
and is elevated or depressed by the gear K′.
The last-named drives the elevating
arc L, which is attached to the cradle at
M, the axis of the gun moving parallel to
the axis of the cradle. In fig. 86 the lower
carriage is almost entirely hidden by the
gears carried on it, namely, the elevating
gear K, the traversing gear N, which
works a spur pinion, gearing into the rack O
attached to the pedestal P: the
elevation indicators Q and R for recording
the angle of elevation of the gun
and the bracket S′ which support the 6″ armour plate T. The weight
of the lower carriage, cradle and gun is taken by a horizontal ring of
hard steel balls resting on the top of a massive forged steel “pivot” U,
the lower portion of which is shown supported in the cast-iron
pedestal. The elevation indicator consists of a sector Q bolted to
the cradle trunnions; to its edge is attached a metal tape, thePAGE:262other end of which is fixed to the spindle supporting a pointer,
reading angles of elevation on the drum R. As the gun elevates
the tape is paid out, the slack being taken in and the pointer revolved
by the action of a clock spring.«FN[230f1]:The elevation indicators are now read on a plate provided with
a spiral groove, which guides a stud on the reader along the scale of
graduations.«/FN» The mounting carries an
automatic sight (see «LN:Sights|Sights«/LN», «I»Gun Sights«/I»).
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto"><tr><td colspan="2">{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 86-7.png|width=720}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SPAN[style:position: relative; bottom:6em]»      «SC»Fig«/SC». 87.«/SPAN»</td><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 86.</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2" style="text-align:center">«SC»Fig«/SC». 86.—British Mark II. Barbette Mounting for 6″ B.L. Gun.«BR» «SC»Fig«/SC». 87—Longitudinal Section of Part of Cradle of Gun shown in fig. 13, through Axis of Buffer.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

«I»The British 12-pr. Q.F. Gun«/I». — A typical mounting for guns of
class («I»c«/I») is the British pedestal mounting for the 12-pr. Q.F. gun.
This mounting consists of a cradle, a pivot, a pedestal and holdfast.
The cradle is a gunmetal casting, provided with trunnions that
rest in bearings on the pivot; the gun recoils in the upper portion
of the cradle and the lower part of the latter is bored at the rear
for an hydraulic buffer and at the front for a running-out spring.
The pivot is of steel, is fork-shaped at the top end, where are the
trunnion bearings for the cradle; its lower end is conical and fits
into bushes in the pedestal, where it is free to revolve but is prevented
from lifting by a holding-down screw.«FN[230f2]:In a later mark there is no holding-down screw for pivot.«/FN» The pedestal is
bolted down to the platform. The gun has a shoulder-piece and it
can be trained and elevated by the layer. It has also an automatic
sight.

A typical Krupp mounting of this kind is shown in fig. 88, Plate VI.,
which represents an 8·8-cm. (3·4″) automatic gun firing, it is stated,
40 aimed rounds in the minute.

«I»The United States 12«/I»″ «I»Mortar«/I».—A typical mounting for pieces of
class («I»d«/I») is afforded by the United States mounting, model of 1896,
for the 12″ B.L. mortar. The piece is mounted in a top carriage or
saddle consisting of two arms connected by a heavy web. This
saddle is hinged on a heavy bolt and is connected to the front of
the turntable (fig. 89). The saddle inclines to the rear and upwards
at an angle of 45°, the upper ends forming trunnion bearings: it is
supported at a point about one-third of its length from the bolt or
fulcrum by five columns of double springs arranged in a row, side
by side. The recoil is checked by two hydraulic cylinders, one on
each side, the pistons of which are attached to the saddle near the
trunnions of the piece. When the mortar is fired the saddle revolves
about its fulcrum to the rear and downwards, carrying the mortar
and compressing the spring columns until the action is stopped by
the hydraulic buffers; the springs then assert themselves and return
the piece to the firing position. The mortar must always be brought
horizontal for loading.
The fighting units of coast artillery in the British service are the
fire command, the battery command and the group. The limits of
a fire command are governed by the possibility of efficient surveillance
and control that can be exercised by an individual, and these
limits vary much from time to time. Usually a number of forts or
emplacements are included in a fire command. The fire command
is broken up into battery commands, in every one of which it must
be possible for its commander actually to take charge of the guns
therein contained in all phases of action. The battery command is
divided up into gun groups, each consisting of one or more pieces
of like calibre, nature and shooting qualities. As a rule a fire
commander is a field officer, a battery commander a major or a
captain, a gun group commander a subaltern or senior N.C. officer.
In connexion with coast artillery «LN:range-finder|range-finder«/LN»s («I»q.v.«/I») and electric
lights (see «LN:Coast Defence|Coast Defence«/LN») are installed and electric communications
established for the chain of command. 

«CTR»«SC»V. Naval Guns and Gunnery«/SC»«/CTR»

In dealing with naval guns and gunnery, we shall take the
British navy as the basis. At the close of the 19th and at the
beginning of the 20th century it appeared that a type of British
battleship (see «LN:Ship|Ship«/LN») had been evolved which was stable as
regards disposition of armament, and that further advance
would consist merely in greater efficiency of individual guns,
in improvements of armour rendering possible the protection
of greater areas, and in changes of engine and boiler design
resulting in higher speeds. The “Majestic,” “Glory,” “Exmouth,”
“London” and “Bulwark” classes differed from each
other only in such details, all of them subordinate to the main
«I»raison d’être«/I» of the battleship, «I»i.e.«/I» the number and nature of
the guns which she carries.

The strength and disposition of the armaments of the ships of
these classes were identical except in small details (see fig. 90).
In every case the main armament consisted of a pair of 12-in.
guns forward and a pair aft, each pair enclosed in a hooded
barbette, which was more commonly designated a turret. The
turrets were on the midship line, and the guns in each commanded
an arc of fire of 240°, «I»i.e.«/I» from right ahead to 30° abaft
the beam on either side in the case of the fore turret, and fromPAGE:263astern to 30° before either beam in the case of the after turret.
The secondary armament, consisting of twelve 6-in. guns, was
also symmetrically disposed. Two guns on either side (four in the
“Majestic” class) were mounted with arcs of fire of from 60°
before to 60° abaft the beam, while two guns each side forward
and two aft (one forward and one aft in the “Majestic” class)
fired through similar arcs to the turret guns, but on their own
sides only. Four of these 6-in. guns were mounted on either
side of the main deck and two on either side of the upper deck,
all being enclosed in casemates.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 89.png|width=700}}

«BR»
«FS[92%]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 89.—12″ B.L. Mortar, Model 1896, U.S.A.«/FS»«/CTR»

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 - Ordnance Fig 90.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 90.—Diagrams showing Disposition of Armament in«BR»Typical Ships.«/CTR»

In the armoured and large protected cruisers built contemporaneously
with these classes of battleships, the 9·2-in. gun had been
largely mounted, and it was the improvements brought about by
practical experience in the rate and accuracy of fire of this gun
that suggested its adoption in battleships to replace the whole
or a part of the 6-in. armament. During the period in which the
battleships referred to above were constructed, the idea of the
functions of the respective divisions of the armament was that
the 12-in. guns were to injure the enemy’s vitals by piercing
his armour with armour-piercing shot or shell, while the business
of the 6-in. guns was to cover him with a hail of shells of large
capacity which were to kill and demoralize his personnel, pierce
his funnels, destroy any navigational or sighting appliances
which were exposed, set his woodwork on fire and render extinction
of the fires impossible, and by piercing or bursting on
unarmoured portions of his side diminish his reserve of buoyancy
and so impair his sea-going qualities.

These ideas were gradually losing favour; it was realized
that the damage done by an armour-piercing shot, whether or
not it hit and pierced armour, was limited to its own path,
while that done by an armour-piercing shell striking an unarmoured
portion of the ship’s side was inconsiderable as compared
with that effected by a common shell of the same calibre.
Further, the area of side, by piercing which an armour-piercing
projectile would reach any portion of the propelling machinery
or magazines of an enemy, was so small compared with the whole
exposed area of his side and upper works that it was scarcely
advantageous to fire at it projectiles, the effectiveness of which,
if they struck another portion of the enemy, was small in comparison
with that of other projectiles which might equally well
be fired from the same gun. Again, the lessons of practical
experience showed that ships might be and were defeated by shell
fire alone, while their armour remained unpierced, and propelling
machinery and magazines intact.

All these considerations led to the conclusion that it was to
intensity of shell-fire, and especially to the fire of large capacity
and high explosive shell, that attention should be directed. At
the same time, while the rate of fire of the 6-in. guns, to which
great attention had been paid, remained stationary or nearly so,
the rate of fire of the 9·2 in. and 12-in. guns had considerably
improved, and their ballistic powers rendered possible more
accurate firing at long ranges than could be effected with the
6-in. guns. The explosive effect of a shell is said to vary as the
square of the weight of its bursting charge. The bursting charge,
with shell of the same type, bears a constant proportion to the
weight of the shell. Now the weight of the 12-in. shell is 850 lb,
that of the 9·2-in. 380 lb, that of the 6-in. 100 lb. Hence it
would require fourteen 6-in. shells to produce the same effect
as one 9·2-in., and seventy-two to produce the same effect as
one 12-in. shell, consequently the 6-in. gun to produce the same
shell effect as the 12-in. or 9·2-in. gun must fire 72 times, or 14
times, respectively, faster. The rate of fire of guns in action
depends upon a variety of conditions, an important one being
that of smoke interference, which tends to reduce the maximum
rate of fire of the smaller guns nearer to that practicable with the
heavier guns, but the rate of fire of the three guns in question,PAGE:264under battle conditions, is in the approximate proportions of
1: 1·5: 4, which would thus produce a shell effect (supposing
the hits made by each type of gun to bear a fixed proportion to
the rounds fired), in the proportions of 72: 22: 4, for the 12-in.,
9·2-in. and 6-in. guns respectively. This argument of course
takes no account of the probably greater effect produced by the
dispersion of the larger number of hits of the smaller gun over
the exposed area of the target, nor, on the other hand, does it
take account of the greater armour-piercing power of the 12-in.
shell which would have the result that a larger proportion of the
hits from the smaller gun would be defeated by the enemy’s
armour, and so prove innocuous.

The shell effect forms a strong argument for the weight available
for the heavy gun armament of a ship being disposed of in
the form only of the heaviest gun available. Another strong
argument is that deduced from the fact already stated, that, as
the calibre of the gun increases, its ballistic powers enable
accurate shooting to be made at a longer range.

The accuracy of a gun at any range depends mainly, for
practical naval purposes, on what is known as the “dangerous
space,” or the limit within which the range must be known in
order that a target of a given height may be struck. Again, the
dangerous space at any range depends upon the remaining
velocity of the projectile at that range, which, as between guns
of different calibres but with the same initial muzzle velocity, is
greater, the greater the calibre of the gun and weight of projectile,
the advantage possessed by the larger gun in this respect being
much increased at great ranges. As a practical example, for a
target 30 ft. high at a range of 8000 yds., the dangerous spaces
of modern 12-in., 9·2-in. and 6-in. guns, which do not differ
greatly in muzzle velocity, are 75, 65 and 40 yds. respectively.
At whatever range a naval action is to be fought, it is evident
that there must be a period during which the enemy is within
the practical 12-in. gun range, and outside the practical 6-in.
gun range, and that during this period the weight allotted to
6-in. guns will be wasted, and this at the outset of an action,
when it is more important than at any time during its progress to
inflict damage on the enemy as a means of preventing him from
inflicting damage on ourselves. But if all the weight available be
allotted to 12-in. guns, the whole of the armament which will
bear on the enemy will come into action at the same time, and
that the earliest, and consequently most advantageous, time
possible. This train of argument led to the substitution of
9·2-in. guns in the 8 “King Edward VII.” class (the first of
which was completed in 1905) for the upper deck 6-in. guns, and
eventually in the “Lord Nelson” and “Agamemnon” (completed
in 1908) to the abolition of the 6-in. armament, which
was replaced by ten 9·2-in. guns.

At the beginning of the present century the subject of “fire
control” began to receive considerable attention, and a short
statement is necessary of the causes which render essential an
accurate and reliable system of controlling the fire of a ship
if hits are to be made at long range. In the first place, even with
the 12-in. gun, the range must be known with considerable
nicety for a ship to be hit. At a target 30 ft. high, at 8000 yds.,
for example, the range on the sights must be correct within
75 yds. or the shot will fall over or short of the target. No rangefinder
has yet proved itself reliable, under service conditions,
to such a degree, and even if one were found, it could not be
relied upon to do more than place the first shot in fair proximity
to the target. The reason for this lies in the distinction which
must be drawn between the distance of a target and its “gun
range,” or, in other words, the distance to which the sights must
be adjusted in order that the target may be hit.

This gun range varies with many conditions, foremost among
which are the wear of the gun, the temperature of the cordite,
the force and direction of the wind and other atmospheric
conditions. It can only be ascertained with certainty by a
process of “trial and error,” using the gun itself. The error,
or distance which a shot falls short of or beyond the target, can
be estimated with a greater approach to accuracy the greater the
height of the observer. It is the process of forming this estimate
which is termed “spotting,” a duty the performance of which
calls for the exercise of the most accurate judgment on the part of
the “spotter,” and which requires much practice in order that
efficiency may be secured. In practice, the first shot is fired
with the sights adjusted for the distance of the target given by the
range-finder, corrected as far as is practicable for the various conditions
affecting the gun range. The first shot is spotted, and the
result of the spotting observations governs the adjustment of the
sights for the next shot, which is spotted in its turn, and the
sights are readjusted until the target is hit. From this time
onwards it is (in theory) only necessary to apply the change in
range, due to the movements of our own ship and of the enemy,
for the interval between successive shots, in order to continue
hitting. This change of range, which may be considerable
(«I»e.g.«/I» 1000 yds. per minute in the extreme case of ships approaching
each other directly, and each steaming at the rate of 15 knots), is
in practice extremely difficult to estimate correctly, and the
spotting is consequently continued in order to rectify errors
in estimating the rate of change in range. For various reasons the
“gun range” which has been referred to is not the same for
different natures of guns. This is mainly on account of the
difference in the height attained by their projectiles in the course
of their respective trajectories. While it is possible, by careful
calibration («I»i.e.«/I» the firing from the several guns of carefully
aimed rounds at a fixed target with known range and under
favourable conditions for practice), to make the shots from all
guns of the same nature fall in very close proximity to each other
when the sights of all are similarly adjusted, it has not been found
possible in practice to achieve this result with guns of different
natures. Consequently guns of each nature must be spotted for
independently, and it is obvious that this adds considerably
to the elaboration and complication of the fire control system.

This constitutes one of the reasons for the adoption of the uniform armament in the “Dreadnought” and her successors; another important reason lies in the fact that with the weight available for the heavy gun armament disposed of in a small number of very large guns, a greater proportion of these guns can be mounted on the midship line, and consequently be available for fire on either side of the ship (see fig. 90). Thus in the “Dreadnought,” eight of her ten 12-in. guns can bear through a considerable arc on either beam, while in the “Lord Nelson,” although all her four 12-in. guns can bear on either beam, half at least of her 9·2-in. armament («I»i.e.«/I» that half on the opposite side to the enemy) will be at any moment out of bearing, and consequently be for the time a useless weight. The same principle of a uniform armament of 12-in. guns has been adopted in the “Invincible” type, the only large cruisers designed since the inception of the “Dreadnought.” Thus the 12-in. gun forms the sole heavy gun armament of all battleships and large cruisers of the “Dreadnought” era. The gun so carried is known as the Mark X., it is 45 calibres in length, and fires a projectile weighing 850 lb with a charge of cordite of 260 lb, resulting in a muzzle velocity of 2700 ft. per second. The Mark XI. gun was designed to be mounted in the later “Dreadnoughts.” Following the same line of development as resulted in the Mark X. gun, it is longer, heavier, fires an increased charge of cordite, and has a higher muzzle velocity, viz. of 2960 ft. per second. This gun appears to mark the climax of development along the present lines, since the price to be paid in greater weight, length and diminished durability of rifling is out of all proportion to the small increase in muzzle velocity. Further developments would therefore be looked for in some other direction, such as the adoption either of a new form of propellant or of a gun of larger calibre. A modern gun of 10-in. calibre is found in the battleships “Triumph” and “Swiftsure.” The next gun in importance to the 12-in. is the 9·2-in., which forms part of the armament of the “Lord Nelson” and “King Edward VII.” classes of battleships, and the principal armament of all armoured cruisers (excepting the “County” class) antecedent to the “Invincibles.” The latest gun of this calibre has developed from earlier types in a similar manner to the 12-in., that is to say, it has experienced a gradual increase in length, weight, and weight of charge, withPAGE:265a consequently increased muzzle velocity. The latest type,
which is known as the Mark XI., and is mounted in the “Lord
Nelson” and “Agamemnon,” is 50 calibres in length, weighs 28
tons, and with a charge of cordite of 130 lb gives to a projectile
of 380 lb a muzzle velocity of 2875 ft. per second. The 7·5-in.
gun forms the secondary armament of the “Triumph” and
“Swiftsure,” and is mounted in the armoured cruisers of the
“Minotaur,” “Duke of Edinburgh” and “Devonshire”
classes. The 6-in. gun, of which there are a very large number
afloat in modern, though not the most recent, battleships, and
in armoured and first and second class cruisers, is the largest gun
which is worked by hand power alone. For this reason, and on
account of its rapidity of fire, it was for many years popular as
an efficient weapon. It was evolved from the 6-in. 80-pounder
B.L. gun, constructed at Elswick, which was the first breech-loader
adopted by the Royal Navy, and whose development has
culminated in the 6-in. Mark XI. gun of the “King Edward VII.”
class and contemporary cruisers, which fires a 100-lb
projectile with a muzzle velocity of 2900 ft. per second. It has
only now passed out of favour on account of its inferior hitting
power at long range as compared with that of guns of larger
calibre, and as a secondary armament of 6-in. guns is still being
included in the latest battleship designs of more than one foreign
navy—notably that of the Japanese, with their practical experience
of modern war at sea—its abandonment in the British Navy
can scarcely be considered final. The 4-in. Q.F. gun is mounted in
the third-class cruisers of the “P” class as their main armament,
and an improved gun of this calibre, with muzzle velocity of
about 2800 ft. per second, is mounted in the later “Dreadnoughts,”
as their anti-torpedo-boat armament.

The increase in size of modern torpedo craft and the increased
range of modern torpedoes has led to a reconsideration of the
type of gun suitable for the protection of large ships against
torpedo attack. The conditions under which the anti-torpedo-boat
armament comes into play are the most unfavourable
possible for accurate gun-fire. The target is a comparatively
small one; it comes into view suddenly and unexpectedly; it
is moving rapidly, and the interval during which the boat must
be stopped, «I»i.e.«/I» that between her being first sighted and her
arrival at the distance at which she can expect to fire her torpedo
with success, is in all probability a very short one. Moreover,
in the great majority of cases the attack will be made at night,
when the difficulties of rapid and correct adjustment of sights,
and of range-finding and spotting, are intensified. Two requirements
then are paramount to be satisfied by the ideal anti-torpedo-boat
gun: (1) it must have a low trajectory, so that
its shooting will not be seriously affected by a small error in the
range on the sights; (2) one hit from it must suffice to stop a
hostile destroyer.

For many years it was considered that these requirements
would be met by the 12-pounder, which was the anti-torpedo-boat
gun for battleships from the “Majesties” to the “Dreadnought,”
the 12-pounders mounted in the “King Edwards” and the
“Dreadnought” being of a longer and heavier type, giving a
higher muzzle velocity. The introduction of a larger gun has,
however, been considered desirable, and a 4-in. gun of new type
is mounted in the later “Dreadnoughts,” while in the older
battleships and large cruisers with secondary armaments it is
considered by many officers that the 6-in. guns will prove to be
the most effective weapon against torpedo craft. The gun
armament of destroyers being required to answer much the same
purpose as the anti-torpedo-boat armament of large ships,
namely, to disable hostile torpedo craft, the type of gun used has
followed a similar line of development.

Starting with 6-pounders in the first destroyers built, the
majority of the new destroyers have a fixed armament consisting
of one 12-pounder forward, and four 6-pounders. This armament
has been changed in the larger destroyers to one of 12-pounders
only, while the latest ocean-going destroyers have two 4-in. guns.
Owing, however, to the strength of the decks of such craft being
insufficient to withstand the stresses set up by the discharge of a
gun giving very high muzzle velocity, the 4-in. gun for use in
light craft is one giving 2300 ft. per second muzzle velocity only
and has a very long recoil. The 6-pounder and 3-pounder Q.F.
guns are no longer being mounted as part of the armaments of
modern ships. A very high rate of fire was attained in the
“semi-automatic” mounting of the 3-pounder, which was last
fitted in the “Duke of Edinburgh” class, but for reasons already
given guns of this type are no longer required, and the 3-pounder
is retained only as a boat gun for sub-calibre practice.

All double-banked pulling boats and all steam-boats are
fitted with arrangements for mounting one or two guns, according
to the size of the boat; the object of the boat armaments being
for use in river operations, for covering a landing, or in guard-boats.
Three descriptions of gun are used, the 12-pounder 8 cwt.
and 3-pounder, light Q.F. guns, and the Maxim rifle-calibre
machine gun.

«I»Gun-Mountings«/I».—Gun mountings in the British navy may
be divided broadly into two classes, power-worked and hand-worked
mountings. The former class includes the mountings
of guns of all calibres mounted in turrets or barbettes, also of
9·2-in. guns mounted behind shields; the latter class includes
mountings of guns of all sizes up to the 7·5-in. which are
mounted in batteries, casemates or behind shields.

Hydraulic power has been adopted almost universally in the
British navy for power-worked mountings, although electricity
has been experimented with, and has been largely applied in
some foreign navies. The principal advantages of hydraulic,
as compared with electric, power are its comparative noiselessness
and reliability, and the ease with which defects can be diagnosed
and rectified. On the other hand, electric power is more easily
transmitted, and is already installed in all ships for working
electric light and other machinery, whereas hydraulic power,
when used, is generally installed for the purpose of working the
guns only. The 12-in. guns in the “Majestic” class, following
the practice with the earliest heavy B.L. guns, were loaded
normally at extreme elevation of 13½°, and the turret had to be
trained to the fore and aft line and locked there for each occasion
of loading. An alternative loading position was also provided,
in which the guns could be loaded at 1° of elevation and with
the turret trained in any direction. Loading in the alternative
position could, however, only be continued until the limited
supply of projectiles which could be stowed in the turret was
exhausted. Experience showed that a greater rapidity of fire
could be obtained by the use of this “all round” loading position,
as it was termed, and in the latest ships of the “Majestic”
class, and in subsequent battleships, the fixed loading position
has been abandoned.

The details of recent 12-in. mountings vary considerably, a
drawing of one of the most recent being shown in fig. 91, for which
thanks are due to Messrs Vickers, Sons & Maxim, but in the majority
of cases there is a “working chamber” revolving with the turret.
A fixed ammunition hoist brings the shell and cartridges from shell-room
and magazine respectively into the working chamber, where
they are transferred to a cage which takes them up, by hydraulic
power, to the rear of the gun. The gun is strapped by steel bands to
a cradle (see fig. 91) which moves in and out along a slide on recoil,
the gun always remaining parallel to the slide. Gun, slide and cradle
are pivoted for elevation on trunnions carried in trunnion bearings
fixed to the structure of the turret, and the whole moving weight is
balanced with the gun in the “run out” position. The recoil of
the gun on firing is taken up by a hydraulic press placed underneath
the slide, and the gun is run out again into the firing position by
hydraulic power. Loading is carried out by means of a hydraulic
rammer, with the gun in the “run out” position, and at an angle of
elevation which varies with different mountings. In the most
recent mountings loading can be carried out with the gun at any
elevation, thus affording considerably greater facility to the gunlayer
for keeping his sights on the target during the process of
loading, and so increasing the rate of fire by enabling the gun to be
discharged immediately the loading operations are completed.
Elevating is by hydraulic power, and is effected by cylinders placed
underneath the slide, the pistons working on an arm projecting
downwards. Turret turning engines are also hydraulic, and much
attention has been given of late years to the perfection of elevating
and turning gear such as will enable the turret or gun to respond
instantly to the wish of the gun-layer, and to move either with considerable
rapidity, or very slowly and steadily as would be the case
when following a target at long range and with but little motion on
the ship. The breech is opened and closed by hand or by hydraulicPAGE:266power, and a douche of water or blast of air, or a combination of
both, removes any smouldering fragments of cordite or cartridge
material before a fresh round is loaded.

{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0266_cceef0d5.jpg}}
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;line-height:90%"><tr><td colspan="8">«FS[83%]»From a drawing supplied by Messrs. Vickers, Sons & Maxim.«/FS»</td></tr><tr><td colspan="8" style="text-align:center">«SC»Fig«/SC». 91. — Diagram of 12-in. Gun Mounting, “Dreadnought” type.</td></tr><tr><td>A,</td><td>Roller ring.</td><td>K,</td><td>Elevating presses.</td><td>R₁,</td><td>Transferring rammer pro-</td><td>R₃,</td><td>Transferring chamber.</td></tr><tr><td>B.</td><td>Gun slide.</td><td>L.</td><td>Guide rail for loading cage.</td><td></td><td> jectiles from trunk cage to</td><td>R₄,</td><td>Training rack.</td></tr><tr><td>C,</td><td>Recoil buffer.</td><td>N,</td><td>Trunk cage.</td><td></td><td> gun-loading cage.</td><td>R₅,</td><td>Training engine.</td></tr><tr><td>D,</td><td>Gun cradle.</td><td>P₁,</td><td>Breech block in open position.</td><td>R₂,</td><td>Transferring rammer for</td><td>S,</td><td>Rotating trunk.</td></tr><tr><td>G,</td><td>Rammer.</td><td>P₂,</td><td>Breech operating hand</td><td></td><td> powder charges from trunk</td><td>T,</td><td>Turntable.</td></tr><tr><td>H,</td><td>Loading cage.</td><td></td><td>wheel.</td><td></td><td> cage to gun-loading cage.</td><td>W,</td><td>Casing for chain rammer.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

Although there is little difference in principle between the arrangements
of the mountings in the later “Majestics” and those in the
“Dreadnought,” improvements in detail have enabled the interval
between successive rounds to be reduced from about 55 seconds in
the former case to 25 or 30 seconds in the latter.

In the turrets containing 9·2-in. and 7·5-in, guns, which exist in
most British armoured and first-class protected cruisers, the moving
weights are, of course, not so large, and, as might be expected, the
assistance of hydraulic machinery is not necessary in so many
operations. A drawing of a typical 9·2-in. gun and mounting is
shown in fig. 92.

Training the turret and elevating the guns are, however, in all
cases performed by hydraulic power, as is the raising of the projectiles
to their place on the loading tray in rear of the gun, but the
breech is opened and closed, and the charge and projectile rammed
home, by hand power only, while the gun, after recoil, is forced out
again to its firing position by means of springs. A ready supply
of thirty-two projectiles is stowed in a “shell carrier,” which is a
circular trough running on rollers round the turret, but independently
of it. When a projectile is required to be loaded into the gun, the
shell carrier is rotated until the required projectile is under a hatch
in rear of the gun, when the projectile is raised by a hydraulic press
on to a swinging loading tray. It is intended that the shell carrier
shall be replenished direct from the shell-room during the pauses of
an engagement. A new type of 9·2-in. mounting has been installed
in the “Lord Nelson” and “Agamemnon,” in which greater use is
made of hydraulic power with a view to improving rapidity of fire.
In this mounting, each projectile is brought up from the shell-room
as it is required, and the loading operations are performed
by hydraulic power instead of by hand.

The “King Edward VII.” class of battleships and “Duke of
Edinburgh” class of cruisers are the last ships in which any 6-in.
guns have been mounted, and with the exception of the 7·5-in.
guns in the “Triumph” and “Swiftsure,” these are the largest guns
which are worked entirely by hand. Other hand-worked guns are
the 4-in. and 12-pounder, which are mounted in small cruisers and
destroyers.

The principles of the 6-in., 4-in. and 12-pounder mountings are
similar. The rear part of the gun is partially enclosed in a metal
cradle, which carries the recoil cylinder and running out spring box.
The gun and cradle are balanced for elevation about trunnions on
the cradle, which fit into trunnion bearings on the carriage. The
latter carries the elevating and training gear, and the whole moving
weight is borne by a pivot pin which rotates on a ball bearing. The
gun recoils in the line of fire, and the energy of recoil is absorbed by
means of the recoil piston, whose rod is secured to the gun, passing
over a valve key secured to the cradle, in such a way as to produce
a channel of varying sectional area through which the liquid in the
recoil cylinder must pass from one side of the piston to the other.
Springs run the gun out again after firing into its original position.
The breech is opened by the single motion of a hand lever. A
“bare” charge is used in the 6-in. and 4-in. guns, with the de Bange
type of obturation, while a brass cartridge case has been retained
with the 12-pounder, as with the earlier Q.F. guns.

Firing is by electricity, percussion being available as an alternative
if required, and the current is usually taken off the dynamo mains
of the ship.

«I»Sighting«/I».—The great advances recently made in accuracy
of fire have been rendered possible, to a very great extent, by, the use of telescopic sighting apparatus. Arrangements are made in all modern sights for the bars or disks which carry the range graduations to be of considerable length or diameter respectively, in order that no difficulty may be found in adjusting the sights for every 25 or 50 yds. of range. In the larger hand-worked mountings, where the laying of the gun for elevation and for direction is effected by two men on opposite sides of the gun, the sights used by them are “cross-connected,” «I»i.e.«/I» connected by rods and gearing to one another in such a way that, initial parallelism of the axes of the two telescopes havingPAGE:267been secured, the adjustments to one sight made by the sight setter
are simultaneously effected at the sight on the opposite
of the gun.
{{IMG:djvu_vol20_page0267_f949145a.jpg}}
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;font-size:92%;line-height:120%"><tr><td colspan="6">«FS[92%]»From a drawing supplied by Messrs Vickers, Sons & Maxim.«/FS»</td></tr><tr><td colspan="6">«CTR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 92.—Diagram of a 9·2-in. Gun and Mounting, “Hogue type.”«/CTR»</td></tr><tr><td>A,</td><td>Roller ring.</td><td>G,</td><td>Elevating press.</td><td>P₂,</td><td>Breech operating hand-</td></tr><tr><td>B,</td><td>Recoil buffer.</td><td>H,</td><td>Shell-lifting press.</td><td></td><td>  wheel.</td></tr><tr><td>C,</td><td>Gun cradle slide frame.</td><td>K,</td><td>Fixed armoured trunk.</td><td>R₁,</td><td>Training rack.</td></tr><tr><td>D,</td><td>Loading tray.</td><td>L,</td><td>Radial shell-lifting crane.  </td><td>R₂,</td><td>Training engine.</td></tr><tr><td>E,</td><td>Shell carrier.</td><td>M,</td><td>Axial powder hoist.</td><td>T,</td><td>Turntable.</td></tr><tr><td>F,</td><td>Pressure water pivot pipes.  </td><td>P₁,</td><td>Breech block.</td><td>U,</td><td>Powder door.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
In practice with the 6-in. and 4-in. guns, one man is responsible
for the laying of the gun for direction, and has consequently only
to think about the coincidence of the vertical cross-wire with the
target, while another man, who also fires, keeps the gun laid
for elevation, and is responsible only for the coincidence of the
target with the horizontal cross-wire. The 12-pounder has one
sight only, one man being considered sufficient to keep the gun
laid for elevation as well as for direction, and to fire. It is
essential that the sights shall be unaffected by the recoil of the
gun, so that they can be adjusted up to the moment of firing
by the sight-setter, and that it shall not be necessary for the gunlayer
to remove his eye from the telescope while the gun is
being fired and reloaded. It is also essential that the sights shall
move automatically in elevation and direction with the gun.
These two requirements are easily met in the hand-worked
mountings by the attachment of the sights to the cradle, which
does not move on recoil, and remains constantly parallel to the
gun; but in turret mountings the case is more complicated and
involves greater complexity of gearing.

The older turret sighting arrangement consisted of two horizontal
shafts, one for each gun, running across the turret, which were
rotated by pinions gearing into racks underneath the gun-slides,
the latter remaining of course always parallel to the guns. Pinions
keyed to these shafts geared in their turn into racks formed on
vertical sighting columns in the sighting positions, these columns,
which carried the sighting telescopes, accordingly moving up and
down with the guns. With this arrangement an appreciable amount
of backlash was found to be inevitable, owing to the play between
the teeth of the several racks and pinions, and to the torsion of the
shafts, and the arrangement was also open to the objection that the
telescopes were much exposed to possible injury from an enemy’s
fire. These defects have been very largely obviated by the “rocking
motion sights,” which have been fitted in the turrets of the latest
British battleships and cruisers. In these sights a sight-bracket is
secured to and rotates with the trunnion of the mounting; the
sight-carrier and telescope move along the top of the sight-bracket,
on a curved arc of which the trunnion is not the centre. When the
sight is at zero, the telescope is parallel to the axis of the gun, while
to adjust the sight, the sight-carrier with telescope is moved along
the curved arc by means of a rack and pinion a distance corresponding
to the graduations shown on the range dial, which is concentric
with the pinion.

«I»Organization«/I».—The organization of a large ship for action is
necessarily highly elaborate. Among the officers, next to the
captain, the most important duties are probably those of the
fire control officer. He is in communication by telephone or
voice tube with each of the several units composing the ship’s
armament. This office is usually filled by the gunnery lieutenant.
In the conning tower with the captain is the navigating officer,
who attends to the course and speed of the ship, assisted by
petty officers to work the wheel and engine-room telegraphs. The
torpedo lieutenant, or another officer at the torpedo director,
is also in the conning tower, prepared to fire the torpedoes if
opportunity offers. Other officers of the military branch, and
marine officers, are in charge of various sections of the
“quarters.”

{{Fine block|The rate of advance in naval gunnery has been much accelerated
since 1902. The construction of the “Dreadnought,” which embodied
a new principle both in nature and disposition of armament,
the rise of the United States and Japanese navies to the first rank,
and the practical experience of the Russo-Japanese war, were all
factors which contributed to the increase of the normal rate of
advance due to progress in metallurgy and engineering science. In
the British as well as in other navies, notably those of Germany,
the United States and Japan, ever-increased attention is being
devoted to the attainment of a rapid and accurate shell-fire, and
large sums are being expended upon fire control instruments and
elaborate aiming and sighting appliances. Size of armaments,
power of guns, resistance of armour, efficiency of projectiles, and,
above all, rapidity and accuracy of fire, all seem to be advancing
with giant strides. But there are two important ingredients of
naval gunnery which are not subject to change: the human factor,
and the factor of the elements—wind, sea and weather. The
latter ensures at any rate one datum point to the student of the
science, that is, that the extreme range in action is limited by
the maximum distance at which the enemy can be clearly seen,
which may be considered to be a distance of 8000 to 10,000 yds.
The permanence of the human factor assures that, however great
the advance in material, and, provided that no great discrepancies
exist in this respect between opposing navies, success at sea will be
the lot of the nation whose officers are the coolest and most intelligent,
whose men are the best disciplined and best trained, and
whose navy is in all respects the most imbued mth the habits and
traditions of the sea. 