PAGE:8401. A steam engine is a machine for the
conversion of heat into mechanical work, in which the working
substance is water and water vapour. The working substance
may be regarded from two points of view. Thermodynamically
it is the vehicle by which heat is conveyed to and through the
engine from the hot source (the furnace and boiler). Part of
this heat suffers a transformation into work as it passes through,
and the remainder is rejected, still in the form of heat. Mechanically
the working substance is a medium capable of exerting
pressure, which effects this transformation in doing work by
means of the changes of volume which it undergoes in the
operation of the machine. Regarded as a thermodynamic
device, the function of the engine is to get as much work as
possible from a given quantity of heat or, to go a step further
back, from the combustion of a given quantity of fuel. Accordingly,
a question of primary importance is what is called the
«I»efficiency«/I» of the engine, which is the ratio of the work done to
the heat supplied. Before, however, proceeding to discuss
the steam engine in this aspect, or treating of the mechanics
of its modern forms, it may be useful to give a brief historical
sketch of its early development as an industrial appliance.
In any such sketch the chief share of attention must necessarily
be given to the work of James Watt. But a process of evolution
had been going on before the time of Watt which prepared the
steam engine for the immense improvements it received at his
hands. His labours stand in natural sequence to those of
Thomas Newcomen, and Newcomen’s to those of Denis Papin
and Thomas Savery. Savery’s engine in its turn was the reduction
to practical form of a contrivance which had long before
been known as a scientific toy. The most modern type of all,
the steam turbine of C. A. Parsons, is a new departure which
has but little to connect it directly with the past; but even the
steam turbine not only profits by the inventions of Watt, but
in its characteristic feature
finds crude prototypes in
apparatus which employed
the kinetic energy of jets of
steam.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:300px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 1.jpg|width=300}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig.«/SC» 1.—Hero’s Apparatus, 130 «SC»B.C.«/SC»</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

2. One of these, indeed, is
mentioned amongst the earliest
notices we
have of any heat
engine. In the «I»Pneumatica«/I»
of Hero of Alexandria («I»c.«/I»
130 «SC»B.C.«/SC») there is described
the aeolipile, which is a «SH»Hero, 130 B.C.«/SH» primitive steam reaction turbine,
consisting of a spherical
vessel pivoted on a central
axis and supplied with steam
through one of the pivots. The steam escapes by bent pipes
facing tangentially in opposite directions, at opposite ends of
a diameter perpendicular to the axis. The globe revolves by
reaction from the escaping steam just as a Barker’s mill is
driven by escaping water. Another apparatus described by
Hero (fig. 1)«FN:From Greenwood’s translation of Hero’s «I»Pneumatica«/I».«/FN» is interesting as the prototype of a class of engines which long afterwards became practically important. A hollow altar containing air is heated by a fire kindled on it; the air in expanding drives some of the water contained in a spherical
vessel beneath the altar into a bucket, which descends and
opens the temple doors above by pulling round a pair of
vertical posts to which the doors are fixed. When the fire is
extinguished the air cools, the water leaves the bucket, and the
doors close. In another device a jet of water driven out by
expanding air is turned to account as a fountain.

3. From the time of Hero to the 17th century there is no
progress to record, though here and there we find evidence that
appliances like those described by Hero were used
for trivial purposes, such as organ-blowing and the «SH»Della Porta, 1601«/SH» turning of spits. The next distinct step was the
publication in 1601 of a treatise on pneumatics by Giovanni
Battista della Porta, in which he shows an apparatus similar
to Herb’s fountain, but with steam instead of air as the displacing
fluid. Steam generated in a separate vessel passes into
a closed chamber containing water, from which a pipe (open
under the water) leads out. He also points out that the condensation
of steam in the closed chamber may be used to produce
a vacuum and suck up water from a lower level. In fact,
his suggestions anticipate very fully the engine which a century
later became in the hands of Savery the earliest commercially
successful steam engine. In 1615 Solomon de Caus gives a
plan of forcing up water by a steam fountain which differs from
Della Porta’s only in having one vessel serve both as boiler and
as displacement-chamber, the hot water being itself raised.

4. Another line of invention was taken by Giovanni Branca
(1629), who designed an engine shaped like a water-wheel, to
be driven by the impact of a jet of steam on its vanes, and
in its turn to drive other mechanism for various useful purposes.
But Branca’s suggestion was for the time unproductive, and we
find the course of invention reverting to the line followed by
Della Porta and De Caus.

5. The next contributor is one whose place is not easily
assigned. To Edward Somerset, second marquis of Worcester,
appears to be due the credit of proposing, if not
making, the first useful steam engine. Its object «SH»Marquis of Worcester, 1663.«/SH» was to raise water, and it worked probably like
Della Porta’s model, but with a pair of displacement-chambers,
from each of which alternately water was forced by steam from
an independent boiler, or perhaps by applying heat to the
chamber itself, while the other vessel was allowed to refill.
Lord Worcester’s description of the engine in art. 68 of his
«I»Century of Inventions«/I» (1663) is obscure, and no drawings are
extant. It is, therefore, difficult to say whether there were
any distinctly novel features except the double action; in
particular, it is not clear whether the suction of a vacuum
was used to raise water as well as the direct pressure of
steam.

6. The steam engine first became commercially successful in
the hands of Thomas Savery,«FN:Savery was born probably in 1650 and died in 1715. See Sir E.
Durning Lawrence’s presidential address to the Royal Institution
of Cornwall («I»Journ. of the Roy. Inst, of Cornwall«/I», No. li.), republished with a reprint of Savery’s «I»Miner’s Friend«/I» of 1702, in which he discusses the originality of Savery’s invention and dismisses the claims put forward for Lord Worcester.«/FN» who, in 1698, obtained a patent for
a water-raising engine, shown in fig. 2. Steam is
admitted to one of the oval vessels A, displacing «SH»Savery, 1698.«/SH» water, which it drives up through the check-valve
B. When the vessel A is emptied of water the supply of
steam is stopped, and the steam already there is condensed
by allowing a jet of cold water from a cistern above to stream
over the outer surface of the vessel. This produces a vacuum
and causes water to be sucked up through the pipe C and
the valve D. Meanwhile steam has been displacing waterPAGE:841«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:245px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 2.jpg|width=245}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig.«/SC» 2.—Savery’s Pumping Engine, 1698.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

from the other vessel, and is ready to be condensed there.
The valves B and D open only upwards. The supplementary
boiler and furnace E
are for feeding water to
the main boiler; E is
filled while cold and a
fire is lighted under it;
it then acts like the
vessel of De Gaus in
forcing a supply of feed-water
into the main
boiler F. The gauge
cocks G, G are an interesting
feature in detail.
Another form of Savery’s
engine had only one displacement-chamber
and
worked intermittently.
In the use of artificial
means to condense the
steam, and in the application
of the vacuum so
formed to raise water
by suction from a level
lower than that of the
engine, Savery’s engine
was probably an improvement on Worcester’s; in any case it
found what Worcester’s engine had failed to find—considerable
employment in pumping mines and in raising water to supply
houses and towns, and even to drive water-wheels. A serious
difficulty which prevented its general use in mines was the fact that
the height through which it would lift water was limited by the
pressure the boiler and vessels could bear. Pressures as high
as 8 or 10 atmospheres were employed—and that, too, without
a safety-valve—but Savery found it no easy matter to deal with
high-pressure steam; he complains that it melted his common
solder, and forced him, as Desaguliers tells us, “to be at the pains
and charge to have all his joints soldered with spelter.” Apart
from this drawback, the waste of fuel was enormous, from the
condensation of steam which took place on the surface of the
water and on the sides of the displacement-chamber at each
stroke; the consumption of coal was, in proportion to the work
done, some twenty times greater than in a good modern steam
engine. In a tract called «I»The Miner’s Friend«/I» Savery alludes
thus to the alternate heating and cooling of the water-vessel:
“On the outside of the vessel you may see how the water goes
out as well as if the vessel were transparent, for so far as the
steam continues within the vessel so far is the vessel dry without
and so very hot as scarce to endure the least touch of the hand.
But as far as the water is, the said vessel will be cold and wet
where any water has fallen on it; which cold and moisture
vanishes as fast as the steam in its descent takes the place of
the water.” Before Savery’s engine was entirely displaced
by its successor, Newcomen’s, it was improved by J. T. Desaguliers,
who applied to it the safety valve (invented by Papin),
and substituted condensation by a jet of cold water within the
vessel for the surface condensation used by Savery. To Savery
is ascribed the first use of the term “horse power” as a measure
of the performance of an engine.

7. So early as 1678 the use of a piston and cylinder (long
before known as applied to pumps) in a heat-engine had been
suggested by Jean de Hautefeuille, who proposed
and to use the explosion of gun-powder either to raise a
piston or to force up water, or to produce, by the subsequent
cooling of the gases, a partial vacuum into «SH»Cylinder and Piston Engine.«/SH» which water might be sucked up. Two years later Christian
Huygens described an engine in which the explosion of gunpowder
in a cylinder expelled part of the gaseous contents, after
which the cooling of the remainder caused a piston to descend
under atmospheric pressure, and the piston in descending did
work by raising a weight.

8. In 1690 Denis Papin, who ten years before had invented
the safety-valve as an adjunct to his “digester,” suggested that
the condensation of steam should be employed to make a vacuum
under a piston previously raised by the expansion
of the steam. Papin’s was the earliest cylinder
and piston steam engine, and his plan of using steam «SH»Papin.«/SH» was that which afterwards took practical shape in the atmospheric
engine of Newcomen. But his scheme was made
unworkable by the fact that he proposed to use but one vessel
as both boiler and cylinder. A small quantity of water was
placed at the bottom of a cylinder and heat was applied. When
the piston had risen the fire was removed, the steam was allowed
to cool, and the piston did work in its down-stroke under the
pressure of the atmosphere. After hearing of Savery’s engine
in 1705 Papin turned his attention to improving it, and devised
a modified form, shown in fig. 3, in which the displacement-chamber
A was a cylinder, with a floating diaphragm or piston
on the top of the water to keep the water and steam from direct
contact with one another. The water was delivered into a
closed air-vessel B, from which it issued in a continuous stream,
against the vanes of a water-wheel. After the steam had done
its work in the displacement-chamber it was allowed to escape
by the stop-cock C instead of being condensed. Papin's engine
was, in fact, a non-condensing single-acting steam pump, with
steam cylinder and pump cylinder in one. A curious feature
of it was the heater D, a hot mass of metal placed in the diaphragm
for the purpose of keeping the steam dry. Among
the many inventions of Papin was a boiler with an internal
fire-box—the earliest example of a construction that is now
almost universal.«FN:For an account of Papin’s inventions see his «I»Life and Correspondence«/I», by Dr E. Gerland (Berlin, 1881).«/FN»
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 3.jpg|width=370}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 3.—Papin, 1705.«/CTR»

9. While Papin was thus going back from his first notion
of a piston engine to Savery’s cruder type, a new inventor
had appeared who made the piston engine a practical
success by separating the boiler from the cylinder
and by using (as Savery had done) artificial means
to condense the steam. This was Thomas Newcomen, «SH»Newcomen’s Atmospheric Engine, 1705.«/SH» «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:230px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 4.jpg|width=230}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 4.—Newcomen’s Atmospheric Engine, 1705.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
who in 1705, with his assistant, John Cawley,
gave the steam engine
the form shown in fig. 4.
Steam admitted from
the boiler to the cylinder
allowed the piston
to be raised by a heavy
counterpoise on the other
side of the beam. Then
the steam valve was
shut and a jet of cold
water entered the cylinder
and condensed the
steam. The piston was
consequently forced
down by the pressure of
the atmosphere and did
work on the pump. The
next entry of steam
expelled the condensed
water from the cylinderPAGE:842through an escape valve. The piston was kept tight by a
layer of water on its upper surface. Condensation was at first
effected by cooling the outside of the cylinder, but the accidental
leakage of the packing water past the piston showed the advantage
of condensing by a jet of injection water, and this plan
took the place of surface condensation. The engine used steam
whose pressure was little if at all greater than that of the atmosphere;
sometimes, indeed, it was worked with the manhole lid
off the boiler.

10. About 1711 Newcomen’s engine began to be introduced
for pumping mines. It is doubtful whether the action was
originally automatic, or depended on the periodical
turning of taps by an attendant. The common story
is that in 1713 a boy named Humphrey Potter,
whose duty it was to open and shut the valves of an engine «SH»Self-acting Valve-gear.«/SH» he attended, made the engine self-acting by causing the beam
itself to open and close the valves by suitable cords
and catches. This device was simplified in 1718 by Henry
Beighton, who suspended from the beam a rod called the plug-tree,
which worked the valves by means of tappets. By
1725 the engine was in common use in collieries, and it held
its place without material change for about three-quarters of a
century in all. Near the close of its career the atmospheric
engine was much improved in its mechanical details by John
Smeaton, who built many large engines of this type about
the year 1770, just after the great step which was to make
Newcomen’s engine obsolete had been taken by James Watt.

Compared with Savery’s engine, Newcomen’s had (as a
pumping engine) the great advantage that the intensity of
pressure in the pumps was not in any way limited by the pressure
of the steam. It shared with Savery’s, in a scarcely less degree,
the defect already pointed out, that steam was wasted by the
alternate heating and cooling of the vessel into which it was
led. Though obviously capable of more extended uses, it was
in fact almost exclusively employed to raise water—in some
instances for the purpose of turning water-wheels to drive other
machinery. Even contemporary writers complain of its vast
“consumption of fuel,” which appears to have been scarcely
smaller than that of the engine of Savery.

11. In 1763 James Watt, an instrument maker in Glasgow,
while engaged by the university in repairing a model of Newcomen’s
engine, was struck with the waste of steam
to which the alternate chilling and heating of the
cylinder gave rise. He saw that the remedy, in his
own words, would lie in keeping the cylinder as hot as the steam «SH»Watt, 1763.«/SH» that entered it. With this view he added to the engine a new
organ—an empty vessel separate from the cylinder, into which
the steam should be allowed to escape from the cylinder, to be
condensed there by the application of cold water either outside
or as a jet. To preserve the vacuum in his condenser he added
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:145px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 5.jpg|width=145}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 5.—Watt’s Experi­mental Apparatus.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
a pump called the air-pump, whose
function was to pump from it the
condensed steam and water of condensation,
as well as the air which
would otherwise accumulate by leakage
or by being brought in with the
steam or with the injection water.
Then, as the cylinder was no longer
used as a condenser, he was able to
keep it hot by clothing it with non-conducting
bodies, and in particular
by the use of a «I»steam jacket«/I», or layer
of hot steam between the cylinder
and an external casing. Further, and still with the same
object, he covered in the top of the cylinder, taking the piston-rod
out through a steam-tight stuffing-box, and allowed steam
instead of air to press upon the piston’s upper surface. The
idea of using a separate condenser had no sooner occurred to
Watt than he put it to the test by constructing the apparatus
shown in fig. 5. There A is the cylinder, B a surface condenser,
and C the air-pump. The cylinder was filled with steam above
the piston, and a vacuum was formed in the surface condenser B.
On opening the stop-cock D the steam rushed over from the
cylinder and was condensed, while the piston rose and lifted a
weight. After several trials Watt patented his improvements
in 1769; they are described in his specification in the following
words, which, apart from their immense historical interest,
deserve careful study as a statement of principles which to this
day guide the scientific development of the steam engine:—

“My method of lessening the consumption of steam, and consequently
fuel, in fire-engines, consists of the following principles:—

“«I»First«/I», That vessel in which the powers of steam are to be employed
to work the engine, which is called the cylinder in common
fire-engines, and which I call the steam-vessel, must, during the whole
time the engine is at work, be kept as hot as the steam that enters
it; first by enclosing it in a case of wood, or any other materials
that transmit heat slowly; secondly, by surrounding it with steam
or other heated bodies; and, thirdly, by suffering neither water nor
any other substance colder than the steam to enter or touch it during
that time.

“«I»Secondly«/I», In engines that are to be worked wholly or partially
by condensation of steam, the steam is to be condensed in vessels
distinct from the steam-vessels or cylinders, although occasionally
communicating with them; these vessels I call condensers; and,
whilst the engines are working, these condensers ought at least to
be kept as cold as the air in the neighbourhood of the engines, by
application of water or other cold bodies.

“«I»Thirdly«/I», Whatever air or other elastic vapour is not condensed
by the cold of the condenser, and may impede the working of
the engine, is to be drawn out of the steam-vessels or condensers
by means of pumps, wrought by the engines themselves, or otherwise.

“«I»Fourthly«/I», I intend in many cases to employ the expansive force
of steam to press on the pistons, or whatever may be used instead
of them, in the same manner in which the pressure of the atmosphere
is now employed in common fire-engines. In cases where cold water
cannot be had in plenty, the engines may be wrought by this force
of steam only, by discharging the steam into the air after it has done
its office...

“«I»Sixthly«/I», I intend in some cases to apply a degree of cold not
capable of reducing the steam to water, but of contracting it considerably,
so that the engines shall be worked by the alternate
expansion and contraction of the steam.

“«I»Lastly«/I», Instead of using water to render the pistons and other
parts of the engine air and steam tight, I employ oils, wax, resinous
bodies, fat of animals, quicksilver and other metals in their fluid
state.”

The fifth claim was for a rotary engine, and need not be quoted
here.

The “common fire engine” alluded to was the steam engine,
or, as it was more generally called, the “atmospheric” engine
of Newcomen. Enormously important as Watt’s first patent
was, it resulted for a time in the production of nothing more than
a greatly improved engine of the Newcomen type, much less
wasteful of fuel, able to make faster strokes, but still only suitable
for pumping, still single-acting, with steam admitted during
the whole stroke, the piston, as before, pulling the beam by a
chain working on a circular arc. The condenser was generally
worked by injection, but Watt has left a model of a surface
condenser made up of small tubes, in every essential respect
like the condensers now used in marine engines.«FN:An interesting detailed narrative of the steps leading to his
invention was written by Watt as a note to the article “Steam
Engine” in Robison’s «I»System of Mechanical Philosophy«/I» (1822).
See Ewing, «I»The Steam Engine and other Heat Engines«/I», pp. 15–19.«/FN»

12. Fig. 6 is an example of the Watt pumping engine of this
period. It should be noticed that, although the top of the cylinder
is closed and steam has access to the upper side of the
piston, this is done only to keep the cylinder and piston
warm. The engine is still single-acting; the steam in
the upper side merely plays the part which was played
in Newcomen’s engine by the atmosphere; and it is «SH»Watt’s Pumping Engine, 1769.«/SH» the lower end of the cylinder alone that is ever put in communication
with the condenser. There are three valves: the “steam”
valve 𝑎, the “equilibrium” valve 𝑏, and the “exhaust” valve
𝑐. At the beginning of the down-stroke 𝑐 is opened to produce a
vacuum below the piston and 𝑎 is opened to admit steam above it.
At the end of the down-stroke 𝑎 and 𝑐 are shut and 𝑏 is opened.
This puts the two sides in equilibrium and allows the piston to
be pulled up by the pump-rod «I»P«/I», which is heavy enough to serve
as a counterpoise. «I»C«/I» is the condenser, and «I»A«/I» the air-pump, which
discharges into the hot well «I»H«/I», whence the supply of the feed-pump
«I»F«/I» is drawn.

13. In a second patent (1781) Watt describes the “sun-and-planet”
wheels and other methods of making the engine givePAGE:843continuous revolving motion to a shaft provided with a
flywheel. He had invented the crank and connecting-rod for
this purpose, but it had meanwhile been patented
by one Pickard, and Watt, rather than make terms
with Pickard, whom he regarded as a plagiarist of «SH»Rotative Engine.«/SH» his own ideas, made use of his sun-and-planet motion until the
patent on the crank expired. The reciprocating motion of earlier
forms had served only for pumping; by this invention Watt
opened up for the steam engine a thousand other channels of
usefulness. The engine was still single-acting; the connecting-rod
was attached to the far end of the beam, and that carried
a counterpoise which served to raise the piston when steam
was admitted below it.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;width:300px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 6.jpg|width=300}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 6.—Watt’s Single- Acting Engine, 1769.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

14. In 1782 Watt patented two further improvements of the
first importance, both of which he had invented some years
before. One was the use of double action, that is
to say, the application of steam and vacuum to
each side of the piston alternately. The other
(invented as early as 1769) was the use of steam expansively, «SH»Other Inventions of Watt.«/SH» in other words the plan (now used in all engines that
aim at economy of fuel) of stopping the admission of steam
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:235px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 7.jpg|width=235}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 7.—Watt’s Double-Acting«BR»Engine, 1782.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
when the piston had
made only a part of its
stroke, and allowing the
rest of the stroke to
be performed by the
expansion of the steam
already in the cylinder.
To let the piston push as
well as pull the end of the
beam Watt devised his
so-called parallel motion,
an arrangement of links
connecting the piston-rod
head with the beam
in such a way as to
guide the rod to move
in a very nearly straight
line. He further added
the throttle valve, for
regulating the rate of
admission of steam, and
the centrifugal governor,
a double conical pendulum,
which controlled
the speed by acting on
the throttle-valve. The stage of development reached at this
time is illustrated by the engine of fig. 7 (from Stuart’s
«I»History of the Steam Engine«/I»), which shows the parallel
motion 𝑝𝑝, the governor 𝑔, the throttle-valve 𝑡, and a pair of
steam and exhaust valves at each end of the cylinder. Among
other inventions of Watt were the “indicator,” by which
diagrams showing the relation of the steam pressure in the
cylinder to the movement of the piston are automatically
drawn; a steam tilt-hammer; and also a steam locomotive
for ordinary roads—but this invention was not prosecuted.

In partnership with Matthew Boulton, Watt carried on in
Birmingham the manufacture and sale of his engines with the
utmost success, and held the field against all rivals in spite of
severe assaults on the validity of his patents. Notwithstanding
his accurate knowledge of the advantage to be gained by using
steam expansively, he continued to employ only low pressures—seldom
more than 7 lb per sq. in. over that of the atmosphere.
His boilers were fed, as Newcomen’s had been, through
an open pipe which rose high enough to let the column of water
in it balance the pressure of the steam. He gave a definite
numerical significance to the term “«LN:Horse-power|horse-power«/LN»” (q.v.) as a
mode of rating engines, defining it as the rate at which work is
done when 33,000 lb are raised one foot in one minute.

15. In the fourth claim in Watt’s first patent the second
sentence describes a non-condensing engine, which would have
required steam of a higher pressure. This, however,
was a line of invention which Watt did not
follow up, perhaps because so early as 1725 a
non-condensing engine had been described by Jacob Leupold «SH»Non-condensing Engine.«/SH» in his «I»Theatrum machinarum«/I». Leupold’s proposed engine
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:215px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine - Fig. 8.jpg|width=215}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 8.—Leupold’s Non-Condensing Engine, 1725.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
is shown in fig. 8, which
makes its action sufficiently
clear. Watt’s aversion to
high-pressure steam was
strong, and its influence on
steam engine practice long
survived the expiry of his
patents. So much indeed
was this the case that the
terms “high-pressure” and
“non-condensing” were for
many years synonymous in
contradistinction to the
“low-pressure” or condensing
engines of Watt. This
nomenclature no longer holds;
in modern practice many
condensing engines use as
high pressures as non-condensing
engines, and by doing
so are able to take advantage
of Watt’s great invention of expansive working to a degree
which was impossible in his own practice.

16. The introduction of the non-condensing and, at that
time, relatively high-pressure engine was effected in England
by Richard Trevithick and in America by Oliver
Evans about 1800. Both Evans and Trevithick
applied their engines to propel carriages on roads,
and both used for boiler a cylindrical vessel with a cylindrical «SH»High-pressure Steam.«/SH» flue inside—the construction now known as the Cornish
boiler. In partnership with William Bull, Trevithick had
previously made direct acting pumping-engines, with an inverted
cylinder set over and in line with the pump-rod, thus dispensing
with the beam that had been a feature in all earlier
forms. But in these “Bull” engines, as they were called, a
condenser was used, or, rather, the steam was condensed
by a jet of cold water in the exhaust-pipe, and Boulton and
Watt successfully opposed them as infringing Watt’s patents.
To Trevithick belongs the distinguished honour of being the
first to use a steam carriage on a railway; in 1804 he built a
locomotive in the modern sense, to run on what had formerly
been a horse-tramway, in Wales, and it is noteworthy that thePAGE:844exhaust steam was discharged into the funnel to force the furnace
draught, a device which, twenty-five years later, in the hands
of George Stephenson, went far to make the locomotive what
it is to-day. In this connexion it may be added that as early
as 1769 a steam carriage for roads had been built in France by
Nicolas Joseph Cugnot, who used a pair of single-acting high-pressure
cylinders to turn a driving axle step by step by means
of pawls and ratchet-wheels. To the initiative of Evans may be
ascribed the early general use of high-pressure steam in the
United States, a feature which for many years distinguished
American from English practice.

17. Amongst the contemporaries of Watt one name deserves
special mention. In 1781 Jonathan Carter Hornblower constructed
and patented what would now be called
a compound engine, with two cylinders of different
sizes. Steam was first admitted into the smaller
cylinder, and then passed over into the larger, doing work «SH»Compound Engine.«/SH» against a piston in each. In Hornblower’s engine the two
cylinders were placed side by side, and both pistons worked
on the same end of a beam overhead. This Was an instance
of the use of steam expansively, and as such was earlier
than the patent, though not earlier than the invention, of
expansive working by Watt. Hornblower was crushed by the
Birmingham firm for infringing their patent in the use of a
separate condenser and air-pump. The compound engine was
revived in 1804 by Arthur Woolf, with whose name it is often
associated. Using steam of fairly high pressure, and cutting
off the supply before the end of the stroke in the small cylinder,
Woolf expanded the steam to several times its original volume.
Mechanically the double-cylinder compound engine has this
advantage over an engine in which the same amount of expansion
is performed in a single cylinder, that the sum of the forces
exerted by the two pistons in the compound engine Varies less
throughout the action than the force exerted by the piston of the
single-cylinder engine. This advantage may have been clear to
Hornblower and Woolf and to other early users of compound
expansion. But another and probably a more important merit
of the system lies in a fact of which neither they nor for many
years their followers in the use of compound engines were aware—the
fact that by dividing the whole range of expansion into
two parts the cylinders in which these are separately performed
are subject to a reduced range of fluctuation in their temperature.
This, as will be seen later, limits to a great extent a source of waste which is present in all steam engines, the waste which results from the heating and cooling of the metal by its alternate contact with hot and cooler steam. The system of compound expansion is now used in nearly all large engines that pretend to economy. Its introduction forms the most outstanding
improvement which steam engines of the piston and cylinder
type have undergone since the time of Watt; and we are able
to recognize it as a very important step in the direction set forth in his “first principle” that the cylinder should be kept as hot as the steam that enters it.

18. Woolf introduced the compound engine somewhat widely
about 1814 as a pumping engine in the mines of Cornwall.
But here it met a strong competitor in the high-pressure
single-cylinder engine of Trevithick, which
had the advantage of greater simplicity in construction.
Woolf’s engine fell into comparative disuse, and the «SH»Cornish Engine.«/SH» single-cylinder type took a form which, under the name of
the Cornish pumping engine, was for many years famous for
its great economy of fuel. In this engine the cylinder was set
under one end of a beam, from the other end of which hung a
heavy rod which operated a pump at the foot of the shaft.
Steam was admitted above the piston for a short portion of the
stroke, thereby raising the pump-rod, and was allowed to expand
for the remainder. Then an equilibrium valve, connecting the
space above and below the piston, as in fig. 6, was opened, and
the pump-rod descended, doing work in the pump and raising
the engine piston. The large mass which had to be started
and stopped at each stroke served by its inertia to counterbalance
the unequal pressure of the steam, for the ascending
rods stored up energy of motion in the early part of the stroke,
when the steam pressure was greatest, and gave out energy in
the later part, when expansion had greatly lowered the pressure.
The frequency of the stroke was controlled by a device called
a cataract, consisting of a small plunger pump, in which the
plunger, raised at each stroke by the engine, was allowed to
descend more or less slowly by the escape of fluid below it through
an adjustable orifice, and in its descent liberated catches which
held the steam and exhaust valves from opening. A similar
device controlled the equilibrium valve, and could be set to give
a pause at the end of the piston’s down-stroke, so that the pump-cylinder
might have time to become completely filled. The
Cornish engine is interesting as the earliest form which achieved
an efficiency comparable with that of good modern engines.
For many years monthly reports were published of the “duty”
of these engines, the “duty” being the number of foot-pounds
of work done per bushel or (in some cases) per cwt. of coal. The
average duty of engines in the Cornwall district rose from
about 18 millions of foot-pounds per cwt. of coal in 1813 to 68
millions in 1844; after which less effort seems to have been made
to maintain a high efficiency («I»Proc«/I». «I»Inst«/I». C.E., 1863, vol. 23).
In individual cases much higher results were reported, as in the
Fowey Consols engine, which in 1835 was stated to have a duty
of 125 millions. This (to use a more modern mode of reckoning)
is equivalent to the consumption of only a little more than
1¾ lb of coal per horse-power per hour—a result surpassed by
very few engines in even the best recent practice. It is difficult
to credit figures which, even in exceptional instances, place the
Cornish engine of that period on a level with the most efficient
modern engines—in which compound expansion and higher
pressure combine to make a much more perfect thermodynamic
machine; and apart from this there is room to question the
accuracy of the Cornish reports. They played, however, a useful
part in the process of steam engine development by directing
attention to the question of efficiency, and by demonstrating
the advantage to be gained by high pressure and expansive
working, at a time when the theory of the steam engine had
not yet taken shape.

19. The final revival of the compound engine did not occur
until about the middle of the 19th century, and then several
agencies combined to effect it. In 1845 M‘Naught
introduced a plan of improving beam engines of the
original Watt type, by adding a high-pressure
cylinder whose piston acted on the beam between the centre «SH»Compound Engine.«/SH» and the flywheel end. Steam of higher pressure than had formerly been used, after doing work in the new cylinder, passed into the old or low-pressure cylinder, where it was further expanded. Many engines whose power was proving insufficient for the extended machinery they had to drive were “M‘Naughted” in this way, and after conversion were found not only to yield more power but to show a marked economy of fuel. The compound form was selected by William Pole for
the pumping engines of Lambeth and other waterworks about
1850; in 1854 John Elder began to use it in marine engines;
in 1857 E. A. Cowper added a steam-jacketed intermediate
reservoir for steam between the high and low pressure Cylinders,
which made it unnecessary for the low-pressure piston to be just
beginning when the other piston was just ending its stroke.
As facilities increased for the use of high-pressure steam,
compound expansion came into more, general use, its advantage
becoming more conspicuous with every increase in boiler pressure—until
now there are few large land engines and scarcely any
marine engines that do not employ it. In marine practice,
where economy of fuel is a much more important factor in
determining the design than it is on land, the principle of
compound expansion has been greatly extended by the introduction
of triple and even quadruple expansion engines, in which
the steam is made to expand successively in three or in four
cylinders. In locomotive engines, where other considerations
are of more moment than the saving of coal, compound expansion
has found some application, but its use there is comparatively
rare.PAGE:84520. The adaptation of the steam engine to railways, begun by
Trevithick, became a success in the hands of George Stephenson,
whose engine, the “Rocket,” when tried along
with others, in 1829, not only distanced its competitors
but settled once and for all the question
whether horse traction or steam traction was to be used «SH»Application to Locomotives.«/SH» on railways. The principal features of the “Rocket” were
an improved steam-blast for urging "the combustion of
coal and a boiler (suggested by Booth) in which a large
heating surface was given by the use of many small tubes
through which the hot gases passed. Further, the cylinders,
instead of being vertical as in earlier locomotives, were set
in at a slope, which was afterwards altered to a position more
nearly horizontal. To these features there was added later
the “link motion,” a contrivance which enabled the engine to
be easily reversed and the amount of expansion to be readily
varied. In the hands of George Stephenson and his son
Robert the locomotive took a form which has been in
all essentials maintained by the far heavier locomotives of
to-day. 

21. The first practical steamboat was the tug “Charlotte
Dundas,” built by William Symington, and tried in the Forth
and Clyde Canal in 1802. A Watt double-acting
condensing engine, placed horizontally, acted directly
a connecting-rod on the crank of a shaft at the
stern, which carried a revolving paddle-wheel. The trial «SH»Application to Steamboats.«/SH» was successful, but steam towing was abandoned for fear
of injuring the banks of the canal. Ten years later Henry
Bell built the “Comet,” with side paddle-wheels, which ran
as a passenger steamer on the Clyde; but an earlier inventor
to follow up Symington’s success was the American, Robert
Fulton, who, after unsuccessful experiments on the Seine,
fitted a steamer on the Hudson in 1807 with engines made to
his designs by Boulton and Watt, and brought steam navigation
for the first time to commercial success.

22. With improvements in the details of design and construction
it gradually became practicable to use higher steam pressures
and higher piston speeds, and consequently to
obtain not only greater efficiency, but also a greater
amount of power from engines of given bulk. In
1872 Sir F. J. Bramwell, describing the typical «SH»Rise in Steam Pressure and in Piston Speed.«/SH» marine practice of that time, gave a list of engines,
all compound, in which the boiler pressure ranged
from 45 to 60 lb, the mean piston speed was 350 ft. per
minute, and the consumption of coal 2 to 2½ lb per hour
per indicated horse-power. In 1881 F. C. Marshall gave
a similar list, in which the boiler pressure was 77 lb, the speed
460 ft. per minute, and the consumption a trifle under 2 lb.
These were compound engines with expansion in two stages.
The triple expansion engine, introduced by Dr A. C. Kirk
in 1874, did not come into general use until after
1881. It became the normal type of marine engine,
with pressures ranging, as a rule, from 150 to
200 lb, piston speeds generally of 500 or 600 ft. per minute,
but sometimes as high as 900 or 1000, and coal consumption
of about 1½ lb per hour per indicated horse-power. In some «SH»Triple and Quadruple Expansion.«/SH» instances quadruple expansion has been preferred, with somewhat
higher pressures, but it can scarcely be said to be
established that the advantage of adding a fourth stage clearly
compensates for the extra complication. Some particulars of
the dimensions reached in modern practice will be given
later. Several of the vessels engaged in the Transatlantic
passenger service, and also a few armoured cruisers, have
engines in which the twin sets together have an indicated
horse-power exceeding 30,000. But even these figures are
eclipsed in ships which are driven by turbine engines. The
cruisers of the “Invincible” class have turbine engines of
41,000 horse-power, and the turbines of the great Cunarders
“Lusitania” and “Mauretania” (1907) develop about 70,000 h.p.
in propelling these ships at a speed of 25 knots. It may be
questioned whether such gigantic concentrations of power for
the propulsion of a ship would have been practicable had it not
been for the new possibilities which the introduction of the
steam turbine has opened up.

23. The invention of the steam turbine has in fact revolutionized
marine engine practice, so far as fast vessels are concerned,
and has supplied a formidable rival to the
reciprocating engine for use on land. The steam
turbine has been brought to a degree of efficiency
which places it, in respect of economy in steam «SH»Introduction of the Steam Turbine.«/SH» than the best engines of the older type in cases where a
large amount of power is to be generated. Its greater simplicity,
compactness and freedom from vibration are merits which
have already gone far to secure for it a preference, notwithstanding
the short time that has passed since it became
known as a practicable engine. The largest demands for power
occur in fast passenger vessels, in war-ships and in stations
from which electric energy is distributed for traction or other
uses; in all these cases the steam turbine is now taking the
leading place. It is to the inventive genius of the Hon. C. A.
Parsons that we owe not only the main idea of the modern
steam turbine, but also the working out of many novel
mechanical details which have been essential to success, as well
as the adaptation of the turbine to marine propulsion.

24. In the steam turbine, as in the water turbine (for which
see «LN:Hydraulics|Hydraulics«/LN»), the force directly operative to do useful work
is derived from the kinetic energy of the operative fluid, either
by the impulse of a jet or jets sliding over movable blades, or by
the reaction of orifices or guides from which the jets issue. The
pressure, instead of being exerted on a piston, is employed in
the first instance to set the fluid itself in motion. There is
a conversion of pressure-energy into velocity-energy as a preliminary
step towards obtaining the effective work of the machine.
But in a steam turbine this implies velocities which are immensely
greater than those with which water turbines have to deal, in
consequence of the much smaller density of steam as the moving
fluid. Attempts to design a steam turbine were made by
numerous inventors, but fell short of practical success mainly
because of the difficulty of arranging for a sufficiently high
velocity in the working parts to utilize a reasonably large
fraction of the kinetic energy of the steam, the principle involved
being that for good efficiency the velocity of the blades should
approximate to half the velocity of the jets which strike them.
There is a further difficulty in getting the energy of the steam
into a suitable kinetic form, namely, to get the stream of issuing
particles to take a single direction, without undue dispersion,
when steam is allowed to expand through an orifice from a
chamber at high pressure into a space where the pressure is
greatly less.

In 1889 Dr Gustaf de Laval introduced a form of steam turbine
in which both of these difficulties were to a great extent overcome,
partly by the special form of the nozzle used to produce
the steam jet and partly by features of design which allowed
an exceptionally high speed to be reached in the wheel carrying
the vanes against which the steam impinged. This simple type
of turbine, which will be described in a later section of this
article, has met with considerable success, especially in comparatively
small sizes, as an engine for driving electric generators.
Its efficiency is fairly good, but it is not well adapted for work
on a large scale, and it has not been applied to the propulsion
of ships.

Parsons attacked the problem at an earlier date, in an entirely
different way in the invention of his “compound” turbine.
By dividing the whole expansion of the steam into a great
number of successive and separate steps he limited the velocity
acquired at each step to such an extent as to make it comparatively
easy to extract the greater part of the kinetic energy,
as work done upon the moving blades, without making the
velocity of these blades inconveniently high. Moreover, in
Parsons’s compound turbine the range of pressure through which
the steam expands in each separate step is too small to give
rise to any difficulty in the formation of the jets. The guide
blades, which form the jets, are distributed round the wholePAGE:846circumference of the revolving wheel, and all the revolving blades
are consequently in action at once. The steam streams from
end to end through an annular space between a revolving drum
and the casing which surrounds it. Parallel rings of fixed guide
blades project inwards from the casing at suitable distances,
and between these are rings of moving blades which project outwards
from the drum and revolve with it. At each step in the
expansion the steam streams through a ring of fixed guide blades,
and the streams so formed impinge on the next ring of moving
blades, and so on. The construction, which is of great simplicity,
will be described later; it lends itself well to the generation
of power on a large scale, especially in cases where a fairly high
speed of rotation is wanted. The more powerful the turbine
the less important do various inevitable sources of loss become;
and hence, though the small turbines which were first built
were less economical than reciprocating engines, the advantage
is the other way where large powers are concerned.

25. Parsons introduced his compound steam turbine in 1884.
For some years it was made in small sizes only, and the steam
was discharged to the atmosphere without condensation. So
long, however, as this was done the steam turbine was sacrificing
one of its most important advantages, namely, its exceptional
capacity for utilizing the energy of low-pressure steam down
to the lowest vacuum obtainable in a condenser. In 1891 it
was first fitted with a condenser, and it then began to be
used in electric supply stations. Its efficiency at that date
was found, in tests made by the present writer, to be comparable
with that of good reciprocating compound engines,
but the figures then obtained were much improved on later in
turbines of larger size and modified design. The first application
to marine propulsion was in the “Turbinia,” in 1897.
The success of this little experimental vessel of 100 tons, which
with its horse-power of 2100 made a record in speed for a ship
of any size, was soon followed by the application of the turbine
to various war-ships and other steamers. In war-ships the use
of steam turbines has a special advantage in enabling the
machinery to be kept at a low level, beneath the protective
deck, in addition to the general advantages of reduced bulk,
reduced vibration, reduced liability to break-down, and reduced
consumption of coal and of oil which are common to vessels of
all classes. The successful trials of the cruiser “Amethyst”
in 1904 demonstrated these advantages so conclusively that all
new war-ships for the British navy, from battleships to torpedo-boats
are being fitted with steam turbines. It is also used in
many cross-channel packets, as well as in the largest ocean-going
passenger vessels. The turbine-driven steamers “Lusitania”
and “Mauretania” (1907) are the most powerful and the fastest
ocean-going vessels afloat. The rapid development of the
marine steam turbine makes it probable that it will displace the
reciprocating engine in all large and fast ships. For slow-going
cargo-boats it is at a disadvantage, unless gearing is resorted
to, on account of the difficulty of securing a sufficiently high
peripheral velocity in the turbine drums without making the
turbines unduly bulky, and the leakage losses (due to steam
passing through the clearance spaces over the tips of the blades)
unduly large. Experiments by Parsons («I»Trans«/I». «I»Inst«/I». «I»Nav«/I».
«I»Arch«/I»., 1910) on a ship in which a slow-running propeller is
driven through reducing-gear from a high-speed turbine, have
given highly promising results.

Enough has been said to show that the invention of the steam
turbine is the most important step in steam engineering since
the time of Watt. It is the first solution of the problem of
using steam efficiently in an engine without reciprocating parts.
The object in most steam engines is to deliver power to revolving
machinery, and much ingenuity has been expended in attempts
to devise engines which will produce rotation directly, instead
of by conversion of reciprocating motion. No rotary engine,
however, was permanently successful until the steam turbine
took a practical form.

26. In the early development of the steam engine inventors
had little in the way of theory to guide them. Watt had the
advantage, which he acknowledges, of a knowledge of Joseph
Black’s doctrine of latent heat; but there was no philosophy
of the relation of work to heat until long after the inventions
of Watt were complete. The theory of the steam
engine as a heat engine dates from 1824, when
N. L. Sadi Carnot published his «I»Réflexions sur«/I» «SH»Theory of Steam Engine.«/SH» «I»la puissance motrice du feu«/I», and showed that heat does work
only by being let down from a higher to a lower temperature.
But Carnot had no idea that any of the heat disappears
in the process, and it was not until the doctrine of the conservation
of energy was established in 1843 by the experiments of
J. P. Joule that the theory of heat engines began a vigorous
growth. From 1849 onwards the science of thermodynamics
was developed with extraordinary rapidity by R. J. M. Clausius,
W. J. Macquorn Rankine and William Thomson (Lord Kelvin)
and was applied, especially by Rankine, to practical problems
in the use of steam. The publication in 1859 of Rankine’s
«I»Manual of the Steam Engine«/I» formed an epoch in the history of
the subject by giving inventors a new basis, outside of mere empiricism,
from which they could push on the development of the
steam engine. Unfortunately, however, it was assumed that the
cylinder and piston might be treated as behaving to the steam
like non-conducting bodies—that the transfer of heat between
the steam and the metal was negligibly small. Rankine’s calculations
of steam consumption, work and thermodynamic
efficiency involve this assumption, except in the case of steam-jacketed
cylinders, where he estimates that the steam in its
passage through the cylinder takes just enough heat from the
jacket to prevent a small amount of condensation which would
otherwise occur as the process of expansion goes on. If the
transfer of heat from steam to metal could be overlooked,
the steam which enters the cylinder would remain during
admission as dry as it was before it entered, and the volume of
steam consumed per stroke would correspond with the volume
of the cylinder up to the point of cut-off. It is here that the
actual behaviour of steam in the cylinder diverges most widely
from the behaviour which the theory assumes. When steam
enters the cylinder it finds the metal chilled by the previous
exhaust, and a portion of it is at once condensed. This has the
effect of increasing, often very largely, the volume of boiler
steam required per stroke. As expansion goes on the water that
was condensed during admission begins to be re-evaporated
from the sides of the cylinder, and this action is often prolonged
into the exhaust. It is now recognized that any theory which
fails to take account of these exchanges of heat between the
steam and its metal envelope fails also to yield even comparatively
correct results in calculating the relative efficiency of
various steam pressures or various ranges of expansion. But the
exchanges of heat are so complex that there seems little prospect
of submitting them to any comprehensive theoretical treatment,
and information is rather to be sought from the scientific analysis
of experiments with actual machines.

27. «I»Formation of Steam under Constant Pressure«/I».—In attempting
a brief sketch of steam engine theory it is necessary to begin by giving
some account of the properties of steam, so far as they are relevant.
The properties of steam are most conveniently stated by referring
in the first instance to what happens when steam is formed «I»under«/I»
«I»constant pressure«/I». This is substantially the process which occurs
in the boiler of a steam engine when the engine is at work. To fix
the ideas we may suppose that the vessel in which steam is to be
formed is a long upright cylinder fitted with a piston which may be
loaded so that it exerts a constant pressure on the fluid below. Let
there be, to begin with, at the foot of the cylinder a quantity of
water (which for convenience of numerical statement we shall take
as 1 lb), at any temperature 𝑡₀; and let the piston press on the surface
of the water with a force of 𝑝 lb per square foot. Let heat now be
applied to the bottom of the cylinder. As it enters the water it
will produce the following effects in three stages:—

1. The temperature of the water rises until a certain temperature
𝑡 is reached, at which steam begins to be formed. The value of
𝑡 depends on the particular pressure 𝑝 which the piston exerts.
Until the temperature 𝑡 is reached there is nothing but water below
the piston.

2. Steam is formed, more heat being taken in. The piston (which
is supposed to exert a constant pressure) rises. No further increase
of temperature occurs during this stage, which continues until all
the water is converted into steam. During this stage the steamPAGE:847which is formed is said to be saturated. The volume which the piston
encloses at the end of this stage—the volume, namely, of 1 lb of
saturated steam at pressure 𝑝 (and temperature 𝑡)—will be denoted
by 𝑣 in cubic feet.

3. If after all the water is converted into steam more heat be
allowed to enter, the volume will increase and the temperature will
rise. The steam is then said to be superheated.

The difference between saturated and superheated steam may be
expressed by saying that if water (at the temperature of the steam)
be mixed with steam some of the water will be evaporated if the
steam is superheated, but none if the steam is saturated. Any
vapour in contact with its liquid and in thermal equilibrium is
necessarily saturated. When saturated its properties differ considerably,
as a rule, from those of a perfect gas, especially at high
pressures, but when superheated they approach those of a perfect
gas more and more closely the further the process of superheating
is carried, that is to say, the more the temperature is raised above 𝑡,
the temperature of saturation corresponding to the given pressure 𝑝.

28. «I»Relation of Pressure and Temperature in Saturated Steam.«/I»—The
temperature 𝑡 at which steam is formed depends on the value of 𝑝.
Their relation was determined with great care by Regnault («I»Mem«/I».
«I»Inst«/I». «I»France«/I», vol. xxi.). The pressure of saturated steam rises with
the temperature at a rate which increases rapidly in the upper regions
of the scale. This will be apparent from the first and second columns
of the following table. The first column gives the temperature on
the Centigrade scale; the second gives the corresponding pressure
in pounds per square inch.

29. «I»Relation of Volume and Temperature.«/I»—The same table shows
the volume 𝑣 in cubic feet occupied by 1 lb of saturated steam at
each temperature. This is based on the investigations of H. L.
Callendar who has shown (see «LN:Thermodynamics|Thermodynamics«/LN» and «LN:Vaporization|Vaporization«/LN»)
that an equation of the form
«CTR»𝑣=Rτ/𝑝 + 𝑏 − 𝑐«/CTR»
is applicable to water vapour, whether saturated or superheated,
within the limits of experimental error throughout the range of
pressure that is important in engineering practice. In this equation
τ is the absolute temperature, R and 𝑏 are constants and 𝑐 is a
term varying inversely as a certain power of the temperature. By
aid of this equation, in conjunction with the results of various
experiments on the latent heat and other properties of steam,
Callendar has shown that it is possible to frame expressions from which
numerical values of all the important properties of steam may be
derived throughout a range of saturation temperatures extending
from 0° C. to 200° C. or so. The values so obtained are thermodynamically
consistent with one another, and are in good agreement
with the most authoritative experimental results. They are
accordingly to be accepted in lieu of those given in earlier steam
tables which depended on measurements by Regnault, and are now
known to be in some particulars erroneous. R. Mollier has applied
Callendar’s method with great completeness to the calculation of
steam tables, and the figures given here are adapted from his results.«FN:R. Mollier, «I»Neue Tabellen und Diagramme für Wasserdampf«/I»
(Berlin, 1906). See also Ewing’s «I»Steam Engine«/I» (3rd ed., 1910).«/FN»
In addition to the relation of temperature, pressure and volume,
the table shows other properties of steam which will be explained
as we proceed.

30. «I»Supply of Heat in Formation of Steam under Constant Pressure.«/I»—We
have next to consider the supply of heat in the imaginary
experiment of § 27. During the first stage, until the temperature
rises from its initial value 𝑡₀ to 𝑡, the temperature at which steam
begins to form under the given pressure, heat is required only to
warm the water. Since the specific heat of water is nearly constant,
the amount of heat taken in during the first stage is approximately
𝑡—𝑡₀ thermal units, or J (𝑡—𝑡₀) foot-pounds, J being Joule’s equivalent,
and this expression for it will generally serve with sufficient
accuracy in practical calculations. More exactly, however, the heat
taken in is somewhat greater than this at high temperatures, for
Regnault’s experiments show that the specific heat of water increases
slightly as the temperature rises. In stating the amount of heat
required for this first stage, to must be taken as a known temperature;
for convenience in numerical statement the temperature 0° C.
is usually chosen as an arbitrary starting-point from which the reception
of heat is to be reckoned. We shall employ the symbol ℎ to
designate the heat required to raise 1 lb of water from 0° C. to the
temperature 𝑡 at which steam begins to form. During the first
stage, sensibly all the heat supplied goes to increase the stock of
internal energy which the fluid possesses, the amount of external
work which is done by the expansion of the fluid being negligible.

The heat taken in during the second stage is what is called the
«I»latent heat«/I» of steam, and is denoted by L. Of it a part is spent in
doing external work, namely, 𝑝 multiplied by the excess of the volume
of the steam 𝑣 over the volume of the water 𝑤, and the remainder is
the difference of internal energy between 1 lb of steam at 𝑡 and 1 lb of
water at 𝑡.

31. «I»Total Heat of Steam.«/I»—Adding together the heat taken in
during the first and second stages, we have a quantity designated
by H which may be called the heat of formation of 1 lb of saturated
steam:—

«CTR»H=ℎ+L.«/CTR»
The heat of formation of 1 lb of steam, when formed under constant
pressure from water at any temperature to, is H−ℎ₀, where ℎ₀
corresponds to 𝑡₀.

It has been pointed out by Mollier that for the purpose of calculations in technical thermodynamics it is convenient to add to the heat of formation the quantity 𝑝𝑤/J, which represents the thermal equivalent of the work spent in introducing the water under the piston, against the constant pressure 𝑝, before the operation of heating imagined in § 27 begins, 𝑤 being the volume of the water. We thus obtain a quantity which in its numerical values differs only very slightly from H, namely

«CTR»I=H+𝑝𝑤/J.«/CTR»
We shall call this the total heat of saturated steam. Values of I
are stated in the table. Since the volume of 1 lb of water is only
0·016 cub. ft. the term 𝑝𝑤/J is numerically insignificant except
at the highest pressures. Similarly, in reckoning the total heat
of water I𝑤 we add 𝑝𝑤/J to ℎ, and this quantity is also given in the table. The latent heat L is to be found from the table by subtracting I𝑤, the total heat of water, from the total heat of steam. We shall use the centigrade scale of temperature throughout this article, and accordingly the total heats are expressed in terms of a unit involving the centigrade degree, namely, the quantity of heat required to raise the temperature of unit mass of water through 1° C. at 15° C. With this unit of heat the mechanical equivalent J is 1400 foot-pounds when the unit of mass is the lb, and is 427 kilogram-metres when the unit of mass is the kilogramme.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="text-align:center"><caption>«I»Properties of Saturated Steam.«/I»</caption><tr><td rowspan="2" style="border:1px solid">Tempera-<br>ture.<br>Centigrade.</td><td rowspan="2" style="border:1px solid">Pressure<br>lb per<br>sq. in.</td><td rowspan="2" style="border:1px solid">Volume<br>cub. ft.<br>per lb.</td><td colspan="2" style="border:1px solid">Total Heat.</td><td colspan="2" style="border:1px solid">Entropy.</td></tr><tr><td style="border:1px solid">Of Water.</td><td style="border:1px solid">Of Steam.</td><td style="border:1px solid">Of Water.</td><td style="border:1px solid">Of Steam.</td></tr><tr><td> 0</td><td>0·089</td><td>3283. </td><td>0</td><td>594·7</td><td>0</td><td>2·178</td></tr><tr><td> 5</td><td>0·127</td><td>2354. </td><td>5·0</td><td>597·1</td><td>0·018</td><td>2·148</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>0·178</td><td>1708. </td><td>10·0</td><td>599·4</td><td>0·036</td><td>2·119</td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>0·246</td><td>1253. </td><td>15·0</td><td>601·8</td><td>0·054</td><td>2·091</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td>0·336</td><td>931.</td><td>20·0</td><td>604·1</td><td>0·071</td><td>2·064</td></tr><tr><td>25</td><td>0·455</td><td>699·5</td><td>25·0</td><td>606·5</td><td>0·088</td><td>2·039</td></tr><tr><td>30</td><td>0·610</td><td>530·7</td><td>30·0</td><td>608·8</td><td>0·104</td><td>2·015</td></tr><tr><td>35</td><td>0·809</td><td>406·8</td><td>35·0</td><td>611·1</td><td>0·121</td><td>1·991</td></tr><tr><td>40</td><td>1·062</td><td>314·8</td><td>40·1</td><td>613·5</td><td>0·137</td><td>1·969</td></tr><tr><td>45</td><td>1·381</td><td>245·8</td><td>45·1</td><td>615·8</td><td>0·153</td><td>1·947</td></tr><tr><td>50</td><td>1·78</td><td>193·7</td><td>50·1</td><td>618·0</td><td>0·169</td><td>1·927</td></tr><tr><td>55</td><td>2·27</td><td>153·9</td><td>55·1</td><td>620·3</td><td>0·184</td><td>1·907</td></tr><tr><td>60</td><td>2·88</td><td>123·3</td><td>60 1</td><td>622·6</td><td>0·199</td><td>1·888</td></tr><tr><td>65</td><td>3·61</td><td>99·5</td><td>65·2</td><td>624·8</td><td>0·214</td><td>1·870</td></tr><tr><td>70</td><td>4·51</td><td>80·9</td><td>70·2</td><td>627·0</td><td>0·229</td><td>1·852</td></tr><tr><td>75</td><td>5·58</td><td>66·24</td><td>75·3</td><td>629·2</td><td>0·244</td><td>1·835</td></tr><tr><td>80</td><td>6·86</td><td>54·60</td><td>80·3</td><td>631·3</td><td>0·258</td><td>1·819</td></tr><tr><td>85</td><td>8·38</td><td>45·29</td><td>85·3</td><td>633·5</td><td>0·272</td><td>1·803</td></tr><tr><td>90</td><td>10·16</td><td>37·79</td><td>90·4</td><td>635·6</td><td>0·286</td><td>1·788</td></tr><tr><td>95</td><td>12·26</td><td>31·71</td><td>95·5</td><td>637·6</td><td>0·300</td><td>1·773</td></tr><tr><td>100</td><td>14·70</td><td>26·75</td><td>100·5</td><td>639·7</td><td>0·314</td><td>1·759</td></tr><tr><td>105</td><td>17·52</td><td>22·69</td><td>105·6</td><td>641·7</td><td>0·327</td><td>1·745</td></tr><tr><td>110</td><td>20·79</td><td>19·34</td><td>110·7</td><td>643·6</td><td>0·340</td><td>1·732</td></tr><tr><td>115</td><td>24·55</td><td>16·56</td><td>115·8</td><td>645·5</td><td>0·354</td><td>1·719</td></tr><tr><td>120</td><td>28·83</td><td>14·25</td><td>120·9</td><td>647·4</td><td>0·367</td><td>1·706</td></tr><tr><td>125</td><td>33·72</td><td>12·30</td><td>126·0</td><td>649·2</td><td>0·379</td><td>1·694</td></tr><tr><td>130</td><td>39·26</td><td>10·67</td><td>131·1</td><td>651·0</td><td>0·392</td><td>1·682</td></tr><tr><td>135</td><td>45·51</td><td>9·29</td><td>136·2</td><td>652·8</td><td>0·405</td><td>1·671</td></tr><tr><td>140</td><td>52·56</td><td>8·12</td><td>141·3</td><td>654·5</td><td>0·417</td><td>1·660</td></tr><tr><td>145</td><td>60·42</td><td>7·13</td><td>146·4</td><td>656·1</td><td>0·430</td><td>1·649</td></tr><tr><td>150</td><td>69·24</td><td>6·274</td><td>151·6</td><td>657·8</td><td>0·442</td><td>1·638</td></tr><tr><td>155</td><td>79·04</td><td>5·542</td><td>156·7</td><td>659·3</td><td>0·454</td><td>1·628</td></tr><tr><td>160</td><td>89·93</td><td>4·910</td><td>161·9</td><td>660·8</td><td>0·466</td><td>1·618</td></tr><tr><td>165</td><td>101·98</td><td>4·363</td><td>167·1</td><td>662·3</td><td>0·478</td><td>1·608</td></tr><tr><td>170</td><td>115·27</td><td>3·891</td><td>172·2</td><td>663·7</td><td>0·489</td><td>1·599</td></tr><tr><td>175</td><td>129·9</td><td>3·478</td><td>177·4</td><td>665·0</td><td>0·501</td><td>1·589</td></tr><tr><td>180</td><td>145·9</td><td>3·116</td><td>182·6</td><td>666·3</td><td>0·512</td><td>1·580</td></tr><tr><td>185</td><td>163·4</td><td>2·800</td><td>187·9</td><td>667·6</td><td>0·524</td><td>1·571</td></tr><tr><td>190</td><td>182·6</td><td>2·523</td><td>193·1</td><td>668·8</td><td>0·535</td><td>1·563</td></tr><tr><td>195</td><td>203·4</td><td>2·279</td><td>198·3</td><td>670·0</td><td>0·546</td><td>1·554</td></tr><tr><td>200</td><td>226·0</td><td>2·063</td><td>203·6</td><td>671·1</td><td>0·557</td><td>1·546</td></tr><tr><td>205</td><td>250·5</td><td>1·874</td><td>208·9</td><td>672·2</td><td>0·568</td><td>1·538</td></tr><tr><td>210</td><td>277·2</td><td>1·703</td><td>214·1</td><td>673·2</td><td>0·579</td><td>1·530</td></tr><tr><td>215</td><td>306·8</td><td>1·546</td><td>219·4</td><td>674·1</td><td>0·590</td><td>1·522</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

32. «I»Internal Energy«/I».—Of the heat of steam the part 𝑝𝑣/J is spent in doing external work. The remainder has gone to increase the stock of internal energy which the substance possesses.

In dealing with the heat required to produce steam we adopted
the state of water at 0°C. as an arbitrary starting-point from which to reckon the reception of heat. In the same way it is convenientPAGE:848to use this arbitrary starting-point in reckoning what may be called
the «I»internal energy«/I» of the substance, which is the excess of the heat
taken in over the external work done by the substance during its
reception of heat. Thus the internal energy E of 1 lb of saturated
steam at pressure 𝑝 is equal to the total heat I, less that part of the
total heat which is spent in doing external work, or

«CTR»E=I−𝑝𝑣/J.«/CTR»

The notion of internal energy is useful in calculating the heat taken
in or rejected by steam during any stage of its expansion or compression
in an engine. When a working substance passes from
one condition to another its gain or loss of heat is determined by
the equation

«CTR»Heat taken in=increase of internal energy+external work.«/CTR»

Any of the terms of this equation may be negative; the last term
is negative when work is done, not by but upon the substance.

33. «I»Wet Steam«/I».—In calculations which relate to the action of
steam in engines we have often to deal, not with dry saturated steam,
but with «I»wet«/I» steam, or steam which either carries in suspension, or
is otherwise mixed with, a greater or less proportion of water. In
any such mixture, assuming it to be in equilibrium, the steam and
water have the same temperature, and the steam is saturated. The
dryness of wet steam is measured by the proportion 𝑞 of dry steam
in each pound of the mixed substance. When that is known it is
easy to determine the other physical constants: thus—
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto"><tr><td>Latent heat of 1 lb of wet steam</td><td>=𝑞L;</td></tr><tr><td>Total heat of 1 lb of wet steam</td><td>=I𝑤+𝑞L;</td></tr><tr><td>Volume of 1 lb of wet steam</td><td>=𝑞𝑣+(1−𝑞)𝑤</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>=𝑞𝑣 very nearly,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
unless the steam is so wet as to consist mainly of water.

34. «I»Superheated Steam«/I».—Steam is superheated when its temperature
is raised, in any manner, above the temperature corresponding
to saturation at the actual pressure. When considerably superheated,
steam approximates in behaviour to a perfect gas.

The specific heat during superheating is nearly constant at low
pressures, its value being approximately 0·48; at high pressures it
is higher, especially when the amount of superheating is slight.
Callendar’s equations enable it to be calculated for any assigned
conditions of temperature and pressure. They also allow a direct
determination to be made of the total heat of superheated steam
of given temperature and pressure, and from this, by comparison
with the total heat of saturated steam at the same pressure, the mean
specific heat over any stated range of superheating, may be found.
Calling I𝑠, the total heat of steam in the saturated condition, when
the temperature is 𝑡, κ the mean specific heat in superheating at
constant pressure to a higher temperature 𝑡′ and I′ the total heat
in the superheated state, we have

«CTR»I′=I𝑠, +κ(𝑡′−𝑡).«/CTR»

The following are values of κ:—

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="data-table _tablecolhdborder" style="text-align:center"><tr style="border:1px solid"><td rowspan="2" style="border:1px solid">Temperature of<br>Superheat 𝑡′ in °C. </td><td colspan="5">Temperature of Saturation 𝑡 in °C.</td></tr><tr style="border:1px solid"><td>80°</td><td>120°</td><td>160°</td><td>180°</td><td>200°</td></tr><tr><td>100°</td><td>0·49</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>150°</td><td>0·49</td><td>0·51</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>200°</td><td>0·49</td><td>0·51</td><td>0·54</td><td>0·57</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>250°</td><td>0·48</td><td>0·50</td><td>0·53</td><td>0·56</td><td>0·59</td></tr><tr><td>300°</td><td>0·48</td><td>0·50</td><td>0·52</td><td>0·54</td><td>0·57</td></tr><tr><td>350°</td><td>0·48</td><td>0·49</td><td>0·51</td><td>0·53</td><td>0·56</td></tr><tr><td>400°</td><td>0·48</td><td>0·49</td><td>0·51</td><td>0·52</td><td>0·55</td></tr><tr><td>450°</td><td>0·48</td><td>0·49</td><td>0·51</td><td>0·52</td><td>0·54</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

35. «I»Isothermal Expansion of Steam«/I».—The expansion of volume
which occurs during the conversion of water into steam under
constant pressure is isothermal. From what has been already said
it is obvious that steam, or any other saturated vapour, can be
expanded or compressed isothermally only when wet, and that
evaporation (in the one case) or condensation (in the other) must
accompany the process. Isothermal lines for a working substance
which consists of a liquid and its vapour are straight lines of uniform
pressure.

36. «I»Adiabatic Expansion of Steam«/I».—If steam initially dry be
allowed to expand adiabatically (namely, without taking in or giving
out any heat) it becomes wet. A part of the steam is condensed
by the process of adiabatic expansion, at first in the form of minute
particles suspended throughout the mass. The temperature and
pressure fall; and, as that part of the substance which remains
uncondensed is saturated, the relation of pressure to temperature
throughout the expansion is that which holds for saturated steam.
Before expansion let the initial dryness of the steam be 𝑞₁ and its
absolute temperature τ. Then, if it expand adiabatically until its
temperature falls to τ, its dryness after expansion may be shown
to be

«CTR»𝑞=τ/L «FS[184%]»(«/FS»𝑞₁L₁/τ₁ + logετ₁/τ«FS[184%]»)«/FS».«/CTR»

L₁, and L are the latent heats (in thermal units) of 1 lb of steam
before and after expansion respectively. When the steam is dry to
begin with, 𝑞₁=1.

This formula is easily applied to the construction of the adiabatic
curve when the initial pressure and the pressure after expansion
are given, the corresponding values τ and L being found from the
table.

37. «I»Ideal Action of Heat Engine«/I».—According to the principles
of «LN:thermodynamics|thermodynamics«/LN» («I»q.v.«/I»), the action of a heat engine depends on
its receiving heat at a temperature higher than that at which it is
capable of rejecting heat to surrounding objects. The working
substance in the engine must necessarily pass from an upper temperature,
at which it takes in heat, to a lower temperature, at which
it rejects heat, the difference, between the heat taken in and the heat
rejected being the thermal equivalent of the work done. It may
readily be shown that when the conditions are such as to make this
difference as great as possible—in other words, to make the efficiency
reach its ideal limit—the ratio of the heat taken in to the heat
rejected depends only on the temperature at which reception and
rejection of heat occur. Calling τ₁ and τ₂ the absolute temperatures
at which heat is taken in and rejected respectively, and Q₁ and Q₂ the
quantities of heat taken in and rejected, the limit of efficiency is
reached when Q₁/Q₂=τ₁/τ₂. The efficiency then has the value

«CTR»(Q₁−Q₂)/Q₁=(τ₁ − τ₂)/τ₁«/CTR»
and W, the work done, is Q₁(τ₁ − τ₂)/τ₁.

In the ideal engine imagined by Carnot the action is of this simple
character. The working substance is brought by adiabatic compression
from the lower to the upper extreme of temperature. It
then takes in heat, without changing in temperature. Next, it
expands adiabatically until its temperature falls to the lower extreme
and finally at that temperature it rejects enough heat to restore it
to its initial state, thereby completing a cycle of operations.

38. «I»Carnot’s Cycle with Steam for Working Substance«/I».—We are
now in a position to study the action of a heat engine employing
steam as the working substance. To simplify the first consideration
as far as possible, let it be supposed that we have a long cylinder
composed of non-conducting material except at the base, and fitted
with a non-conducting piston; also a source of heat A at some
temperature τ₁; a receiver of heat, or, as we may now call it, a condenser
C, at a lower temperature τ₂; and a non-conducting cover B.
Then We can perform as follows the ideal reversible cycle of operations
first described by Carnot, which gives the highest possible efficiency
attainable in any heat engine. To fix the ideas, suppose that there
is 1 lb of water in the cylinder to begin with, at the temperature τ₁:—
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:225px"><tr><td colspan="2">{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 9.png|align=right|width=210}}</td></tr><tr><td></td><td><span style="position: relative; bottom: 2.5em;">«SC»Fig«/SC». 9.—Carnot’s Cycle with«BR»water and steam for working«BR»substance.</span></td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
1. Apply A, and allow the piston to rise. The water will take
in heat and be converted into steam, expanding isothermally at
constant pressure 𝑝₁. This part
of the operation is shown
by the line 𝑎𝑏 in fig. 9.

2. Remove A and apply
B. Allow the expansion to
continue adiabatically (𝑏𝑐),
with falling pressure, until
the temperature falls to τ₂.
The pressure will then be 𝑝₂,
namely, the pressure given
in the table corresponding
to τ₂.

3. Remove B, apply C,
and compress. Steam is condensed
by rejecting heat to
C. The action is isothermal,
and the pressure remains
𝑝₂. Let this be continued
until a certain point 𝑑 is
reached, after which adiabatic compression will complete the cycle.

4. Remove C and apply B. Continue the compression, which
is now adiabatic. If the point 𝑑 has been rightly chosen, this will
complete the cycle by restoring,the working fluid to the state of
water at temperature τ₁.

The “indicator diagram” or diagram exhibiting the relation of
pressure to volume for such a cycle is given in fig. 9. Since the
process is reversible, and since heat is taken in only at τ₁ and rejected
only at τ₂, the ideal conditions for perfect efficiency are satisfied, and
accordingly the efficiency is (τ₁−τ₂)/τ₁. The heat taken in per lb of
the fluid is L₁, and the work done is L₁(τ₁−τ₂)/τ₁, a result which
may be used to check the calculation of the diagram.

39. «I»Efficiency of a Perfect Steam Engine: Limits of Temperature«/I».—
If the action here described could be realized in practice, we should
have a thermodynamically perfect steam engine using saturated
steam. The fraction of the heat supplied to it which such an engine
would convert into work would depend simply on the temperature,
and therefore on the pressure, at which the steam was produced and
condensed. The temperature of condensation is limited by the
consideration that there must be an abundant supply of some
substance to absorb the rejected heat; water is actually used for
this purpose, so that τ₂ has for its lower limit the temperature of
the available water-supply.

To the higher temperature τ₁ a practical limit is set by the
mechanical difficulties, with regard to strength and to lubrication,
which attend the use of high-pressure steam. In engines of ordinary
construction the pressure is rarely so much as 250 lb per sq. in.PAGE:849It must not be supposed that the efficiency (τ₁−τ₂)/τ₁ is actually 
attained, or is even attainable. Many causes conspire to prevent
steam engines from being thermodynamically perfect, and some of
the causes of imperfection cannot be removed.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:245px"><tr><td>«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 10.png|width=225}}

«BR» «SC»Fig«/SC». 10.—Organs of a Steam Engine.«/CTR»</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
40. «I»Engine with Separate Organs«/I».—In the ideal engine represented
in fig. 10 the functions of boiler, cylinder and condenser are combined
in a single vessel; but, provided the working substance passes
through the same cycle of operations, it is indifferent whether these
are performed in several vessels or in one. To approach a little
more closely the conditions that hold in practice, we may think of
the engine as consisting of
a boiler A (fig. 10) kept at
τ₁, a non-conducting cylinder
and piston B, a surface condenser
C kept at τ₂, and a
feed-pump D which restores
the condensed water to the
boiler. When the several
organs of the engine are
separated in this way we
can still carry out the first
three stages of the cyclic
process described in § 38.
The first stage of that cycle
corresponds to the «I»admission«/I»
of steam from the boiler
into the cylinder. Then the point known as the point of «I»cut-off«/I»
is reached, at which admission ceases, and the steam already
in the cylinder is allowed to expand, exerting a diminishing pressure
on the piston. This is the second stage, or the stage of
«I»expansion«/I». The process of expansion may be carried on until
the pressure falls to that of the condenser, in which case the
expansion is said to be complete. At the end of the expansion «I»release«/I»
takes place, that is to say, communication is opened with the condenser.
Then the return stroke begins, and a period termed the
«I»exhaust«/I» occurs, that is to say, steam passes out of the cylinder, into
the condenser, where it is condensed at the pressure in the condenser,
which is felt as a «I»back pressure«/I» opposing the return of the piston.
So far, all has been essentially reversible and identical with the
corresponding parts of Carnot’s cycle.

But we cannot complete the cycle as Carnot’s cycle was completed.
The existence of a separate condenser makes the fourth stage, that
of adiabatic compression, impracticable, and the best we can do is
to continue the exhaust until condensation is complete, and then
return the condensed water to the boiler.

41. «I»Rankine Cycle«/I».—It follows that the ideal cycle of Carnot is
not an appropriate standard with which to compare the action of
a real steam engine. Instead of it we have, in the engine with
separated organs, a cycle which is commonly called the Rankine
cycle, which differs from the Carnot cycle only in this, that the stage
of adiabatic compression, is wanting and its place is taken by a
direct return of the condensed water to the boiler, a process which
makes the water receive heat at various temperatures, ranging from
the temperature of the condenser up to that of the boiler. The chief
part of the heat which the working substance receives is still taken
in at the upper limit of temperature, during the process of changing
from water to steam. But a small part is taken in at lower temperatures,
namely, in the heating of the feed water in its transfer to the
boiler. Any heat so taken in has less availability for conversion
into work than if it were taken in at the top of the range, and consequently
the ideal efficiency of the cycle falls somewhat short of this
ideal reached in the cycle of Carnot.

But the principle still applies that with respect to each portion
of the heat that is taken in, the fraction convertible into work under
ideally favourable conditions is measured by (τ−τ₂)/τ, where τ is the
absolute temperature at which that portion of heat is received,
and τ₂ is the temperature at which heat is rejected. Accordingly,
we may investigate as follows the ideal performance of an engine
following the Rankine cycle. Let δQ represent that portion of
the whole heat which is taken in at any temperature τ. Then the
greatest amount of work obtainable from that portion of heat is
δQ(τ−τ₂)/τ, and the whole amount of work ideally obtainable in
the complete process is found by calculating, ΣδQ(τ−τ₂)/τ where
the summation includes all the heat that is taken in. In a steam
engine using saturated steam the principal item in this sum is the
latent heat L₁, which is taken in at constant temperature τ₁, during
the change of state from water to steam. But there is, in addition,
the heat taken in by the feed-water before it reaches the temperature
at which steam is formed, and this may be represented as the sum
of a series of elements σδτ taken in at varying temperatures τ,
where σ is the specific heat of water. Thus if W represents the thermal
equivalent of the work theoretically obtainable per lb of steam, under
ideally favourable conditions,

«CTR»W=Σσδτ(τ−τ₂)/τ + L₁(τ₁−τ₂)/τ₁.«/CTR»

The experiments of Regnault show that σ, within the limits of
temperature that obtain in boilers, is a nearly constant quantity,
and no serious error will be introduced in this integration by
treating it as a constant, with a value equal to the mean value, as
determined by Regnault, between the limits of τ₁ and τ₂. On this
basis

«CTR»W=σ(τ₁−τ₂)−στ₂ logετ₁/τ₂ + L₁(τ₁−τ₂)/τ₁.«/CTR»

It is usual to take σ as practically equal to 1, which makes

«CTR»W=(τ−τ₂)«XL»(«/XL»1 + L₁/τ₁«XL»)«/XL» − τ₂ logετ₁/τ₂.«/CTR»

This expresses the greatest amount of work which each pound of steam
can yield when the temperature τ₁ at which it reaches the engine
and the temperature τ₂ at which it leaves the engine are assigned.
It consequently serves as a standard with which the actual performance
may usefully be compared. The actual yield per lb
of steam is always considerably less, chiefly because the ideal
condition of adiabatic expansion from the higher to the lower
extreme of temperature is never satisfied.

A more simple expression for the work theoretically obtainable
per lb of steam when expanded adiabatically under the conditions
of the Rankine cycle, is

«CTR»I₁−I₂,«/CTR»

where I₁ is the total heat of the working substance in the initial
state, before the adiabatic expansion, and I₂ is its total heat after
that expansion. For it may readily be proved that, in an adiabatic
process,

«CTR»I₁−I₂=1/J«MATH:\int_{p_2}^{p_1}«/MATH»𝑣𝑑𝑝,«/CTR»

and this integral is the area of the indicator diagram when the
substance is taken in at 𝑝₁, expanded to 𝑝₂ and discharged at 𝑝₂.

This expression applies whether the steam is initially superheated
or not. I₂ will in general be the total heat of a wet mixture, and to
calculate it we must know the condition as to wetness which results
from the expansion. This is most easily found, especially when
there has been initial superheat, by making use of the entropy-temperature
diagram to be presently described, or by other graphic
methods, for an account of which the reader should refer to the paper
by Mollier already cited, or to J. A. Ewing’s «I»The Steam Engine and«/I»
«I»other Heat Engines«/I» (3rd ed.).

42. «I»Entropy«/I».—The study of steam-engine problems is greatly
assisted by introducing the idea of entropy and making use of diagrams
in which the two co-ordinates are entropy and temperature.
Entropy is a condition of the working substance defined by the
statement that when any quantity of heat δQ is received by, or
generated in, or rejected by the substance, when its absolute temperature
is τ, the substance gains or loses entropy by the amount
δQ/τ. Thus ΣδQ/τ measures the whole change of entropy in a
process which involves the taking in or rejection of heat at more
than one temperature. We shall denote entropy by φ, and consider
it as reckoned per unit of mass of the substance. Since by definition
of entropy δφ=δQ/τ, τδφ=δQ, and hence if a curve be drawn
with τ and φ for ordinates to exhibit the action of a working substance,
the area under the curve, or ∫τ𝑑φ, being equal to ΣδQ, measures
the heat which the substance has received or rejected during the
operation which the curve represents.

In a reversible cycle of operations Carnot’s principle shows that
ΣδQ/τ=0, and it is obvious in such a case that the entropy returns
at the end of the cycle to its primitive value. The same result may
be extended to a cycle which includes any non-reversible step, by
taking account of the heat generated within the substance by such
a step, as if it were heat communicated from outside, in the reckoning
of entropy. Thus, for example, if at one stage in the cycle the substance
passes through a throttle-valve, which lowers its pressure
without letting it do work, the action is equivalent in effect to an
adiabatic expansion, together with the communication to the substance,
as heat, of the work which is lost in consequence of the
irreversible expansion through the throttle-valve taking the place
of adiabatic expansion against a piston. If this heat be included
in the reckoning ΣδQ/τ=0 for the complete cycle.

The entropy-temperature diagram for any complete cyclic process
is a closed curve, and the area it encloses, being the excess of the
heat received over the heat rejected, measures the work done. The
entropy-temperature diagram shares this useful characteristic with
the pressure-volume diagram, and in addition it shows directly the
heat received and the heat rejected by the areas under the forward
and backward limbs of the curve. To draw the entropy-temperature
diagram for the ideal steam engine (namely, the engine following
the Rankine cycle), we have to reckon first the entropy which water
acquires in being heated, and next the entropy L₁/τ₁ which is acquired
when the conversion into steam has taken place. Reckoning from
any standard temperature τ₀, in the heating of the feed-water up
to any temperature τ, the entropy acquired is

«MATH:\phi_w = \int_{\tau^0}^\tau \frac{\sigma d \tau}{\tau},«/MATH»

and taking σ as sensibly constant,

«MATH:\phi_w = \sigma (\log_\epsilon\tau - \log_\epsilon - \log_\epsilon\tau_0).«/MATH»

During evaporation at τ₁ a quantity of heat L₁ is taken in at
temperature τ₁, and hence the entropy of the steam

«MATH:\phi_s = \phi_w + \text{L}_1/\tau_1 = \sigma(\log_\epsilon \tau_1 - \log_\epsilon \tau_0) + \text{L}_1/\tau_1.«/MATH»PAGE:850Values of the entropy of water and steam are given in the table. 
The entropy-temperature diagram for a Rankine cycle is illustrated 
in fig. 11, where 𝑎𝑏, a 
logarithmic curve, represents
the process of heating
the feed-water, and 
𝑏𝑐 the passage from the 
state of water into that 
of steam. The diagram 
is drawn to scale for a 
case in which steam is 
formed at a pressure of 
180 lb per sq. in., and 
condensed at a pressure 
of 1 lb per sq. in. After 
the formation of the 
steam, the next step in 
the ideal process is 
adiabatic expansion from 
the higher to the lower 
limit of temperature, 
which is represented by 
the vertical straight line 
𝑐𝑑, an adiabatic process 
being also isentropic. Finally, the cycle is completed by 𝑑𝑎, which represents
the condensation of the steam after its temperature has been 
reduced by adiabatic expansion to the lower limit of temperature. 
The area 𝑎𝑏𝑐𝑑 represents the work done, and its value per lb of 
steam is identical with W as reckoned above. The area 𝑚𝑎𝑏𝑐𝑝 is 
the whole heat taken in, and the area 𝑚𝑎𝑑𝑝 is the heat rejected. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 11.png|width=275}}

«BR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 11«/CTR»

Let a curve 𝑐𝑓 be drawn to show the values of the entropy of 
steam for various temperatures of saturation: then if 𝑎𝑑 be produced
to meet the curve in 𝑓, the ratio 𝑓𝑑/𝑓𝑎 represents the fraction 
of the steam which was condensed during adiabatic expansion. 
For the point 𝑓 represents the state of 1 lb of saturated steam, and 
in the condensation of 1 lb of saturated steam the heat given out 
would be the area under 𝑓𝑎, whereas the heat actually given out in 
the condensation from 𝑑 was the area under 𝑑𝑎. Thus the state 
at 𝑑 is that of a wet mixture in which 𝑑𝑎/𝑓𝑎 represents the fraction 
present as steam, and 𝑓𝑑/𝑓𝑎 the fraction present as water. It obviously 
follows that by drawing horizontal lines at intermediate temperatures
the development of wetness in the expanding steam can be 
readily traced. Again, if the steam is not dry when expansion begins, 
its state may be represented by making the expansion line begin 
at a point in the line 𝑏𝑐, such that the segments into which the line 
is divided are proportional to the constituents of the wet mixture. 
In this way the ideal process may be exhibited for steam with any 
assumed degree of initial wetness. Further, the entropy-temperature 
diagram admits of ready application to the case of incomplete 
expansion. Suppose, for example, that after adiabatic expansion 
from 𝑐 to 𝑐′ (fig. 12) the steam is directly cooled to the lower-limit 
temperature by the application of cooling water instead of by continued
expansion. This process is represented by the line 𝑐′𝑒𝑑, 
which is a curve of constant volume. Its form is determined by 
the consideration that at any point 𝑒 the proportion of steam still 
uncondensed, or 𝑙𝑒/𝑙𝑘, is such that the mixture fills the same volume 
as was filled at 𝑐′. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 12.png|width=295}}

«BR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 12«/CTR»

43. «I»Entropy«/I»-«I»Temperature Diagrams extended to the Case of Superheated Steam«/I».—In
the diagrams which have been sketched, it has 
been assumed that the 
steam is supplied to the 
engine in a saturated state. 
To extend the same treatment
to the case of superheated
steam, we have to 
take account of the supplementary
supply of heat 
which the steam receives 
after the point 𝑐 is reached, 
and before expansion begins.
When superheating 
is resorted to, as is now
often the case in practice,
the superheat is given at
constant pressure. If κ
represent as before the
mean specific heat of steam
at constant pressure, the 
addition of entropy during
the process of superheating from τ₁ to τ′ is κ(τ′ − τ₁). The value of 
κ may be treated as approximately constant, and the addition to 
the entropy may then be written as κ(log τ − log τ₁). This gives a 
line such as 𝑐𝑟 on the entropy diagram (fig. 13), and increases 
the value of W by the amount 

«MATH:\int_{\tau_1}^{\tau'} \frac{\kappa d\tau(\tau - \tau_2)}{\tau}«/MATH»

which is represented on the diagram by the area 𝑑𝑐𝑟𝑠. During 
adiabatic expansion from 𝑟 the steam remains superheated until 
it reaches the state 𝑡, when it is just saturated, and further 
expansion results in the condition of wetness indicated by 𝑠. The 
extra work 𝑑𝑐𝑟𝑠 is done at the expense of the extra supply of heat 
𝑝𝑐𝑟𝑢, and an inspection of the diagram suffices to show that the 
efficiency of the ideal cycle is only very slightly increased by even 
a large amount of superheating. In practice, however, superheating 
does much to promote efficiency, because it materially reduces the 
amount by which the actual performance of an engine falls short 
of the ideal performance by keeping the steam comparatively dry 
in its passage through the engine, and thereby reducing exchanges 
ot heat between the steam and the metal. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 13.png|width=215}}

«BR»«SC»Fig«/SC». 13«/CTR»

44. «I»Entropy of Wet Steam«/I».—The entropy of «I»wet«/I» steam is readily
calculated by considering that the change of entropy in the conversion
from water to steam will be 𝑞L/τ if the steam is wet, 𝑞 being
the dryness Accordingly the entropy of wet steam at any temperature
τ is σ(logετ − logετ₀)+𝑞L/τ. Further, since σ for water is
practically equal to unity this expression may be written

«CTR»φ=logετ − logετ₀+𝑞L/τ.«/CTR»

We may apply this expression to trace the development of wetness 
in steam when it expands adiabatically. In adiabatic expansion 
φ=constant. Using the suffix 1 to distinguish the initial state, 
we therefore have at any stage in the expansion 

«CTR»logετ − logετ₀=logετ₁ − logετ₀ +𝑞₁L₁/τ₁,«/CTR»

from which the dryness at that stage is found, namely, 

«CTR»𝑞=τ/L«XXL»(«/XXL»𝑞₁L₁/τ₁ + logετ₁/τ₁«XXL»)«/XXL».«/CTR»

The expression is not applicable to steam which is initially superheated.
In either case the graphic method of tracing the change 
of condition during adiabatic expansion is available. 

45. «I»Actual Performance«/I».—Trials of engines using saturated steam 
show that in the most favourable cases from 60 to 65% of the ideally 
possible amount of work is realized as “indicated” work One 
of the causes of loss is that the expansion is incomplete. In practice 
the steam is allowed to escape to the condenser, while its pressure 
is still considerably higher than the pressure at which condensation 
is to take place. When the pressure of steam in the cylinder has 
been so far reduced by expansion that it can only overcome the 
friction of the piston, there is no advantage in going on further; 
the indicated work due to any additional expansion would add 
nothing to the output of the engine, when allowance is made for 
the work spent on friction within the mechanism itself. Considerations
of bulk often lead to an even earlier release of the expanding 
steam; and another consideration which points the same way is that 
when expansion is carried very far, the losses due to exchange of 
heat between the cylinder and the steam, referred to below, tend 
to increase. Again, since experience shows that the most efficient 
engines are those in which the process of expansion is divided into 
two, three or more stages by the use of compounded cylinders, 
a certain amount of loss is to be ascribed to the drops in pressure 
which are liable to occur through unresisted expansion in the transfer 
of steam from one vessel to another. But the chief cause of loss 
is to be found in the exchanges of heat which take place between 
the steam and the metal. In each cylinder there is a process of
alternate condensation and re-evaporation—condensation during
the period of admission, when the steam finds itself brought into
contact with metal which has been chilled by evaporation during
the preceding exhaust stroke, and then evaporation, when the
pressure has fallen sufficiently, during the later stage of expansion, 
as well as during exhaust. The consequence is that the steam 
though supplied in a dry «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:215px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 14.png|width=215}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 14</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
state, may contain some 20 
or 30% of moisture when 
admission to the cylinder is 
complete, and the entropy 
diagram for the real process 
of expansion takes a form 
such as is indicated by the 
line 𝑐′𝑐″ in fig. 14. The heat
supplied is still measured by 
the area under 𝑎𝑏𝑐. The 
condensation from 𝑐 to 𝑐′ occurs by contact with the walls of the 
cylinder; and though part of the heat thus abstracted is restored 
before release occurs at 𝑐″, the general result is to make a large 
reduction in the area of the diagram. 

46. «I»Exchanges of Heat between the Steam and the Metal«/I».—The
exchanges of heat between steam and metal in the engine cylinder 
have been made the subject of an elaborate experimental examinationPAGE:851by Professors Callendar and Nicolson («I»Proc. Inst. C.E.«/I»
cxxxi. 147), who studied the cyclic variations of temperature 
throughout the metal by means of thermo-electric junctions set
at various depths. They found that the range of temperature
through which the surface of the metal fluctuates is much less than
the range of temperature passed through by the steam; the
processes of condensation and re-evaporation are slow, and the time
is too short to bring the surface of the metal into anything like
equilibrium with the steam. The amount of condensation up to
the point of cut-off, as inferred from the heat which the metal takes
up, may be much less than the “missing quantity” or difference
between the steam supplied per stroke and the dry steam then present.
According to their experiments, this discrepancy is accounted for
by leakage of steam past the valve, direct from the steam chest to
the exhaust, and they suggest that this source of error may have
been present in many estimates of initial condensation based on
determinations of the missing quantity. This may explain cases
in which the initial condensation has apparently been excessive,
but large amounts of initial condensation certainly do occur, and
constitute the most potent factor in making the real performance
of the engine fall short of the ideal standard.«FN[829f1]:See also “Report of Steam Engine Research Committee,” «I»Inst«/I».
«I»Mech. Eng.«/I» (1905).«/FN»

In the alternate condensation and re-evaporation of steam in the 
cylinder more heat is given to the metal by each pound of steam that
is condensed than is taken from the metal by each pound of steam
that is re-evaporated, the temperature of condensation being higher
than that of re-evaporation. The quantity H₁−H₂, namely, the
difference in the heat of formation at the two temperatures, represents
this excess of heat. Unless this is in some way abstracted
from the metal, the process cannot occur. Hence the action of the
cylinder walls in causing alternate condensation and re-evaporation
to occur may be limited by imposing conditions which prevent or
reduce the abstraction of heat. By the use of a steam jacket the
metal may be prevented from losing heat externally, and may even
be made to take up heat. Under these conditions the action
depends on the fact that more water is re-evaporated than is condensed.
To some extent this is a necessary result of the work done
during expansion, which (in an adiabatic process) would make the
steam become wetter as expansion proceeds, and would therefore
leave more water to be evaporated than is initially condensed by
the action of the cylinder walls. But it is important to notice that
any water which is introduced into the cylinder along with the steam
will be an important factor in supplying the means by which this
thermal balance is maintained. With steam that is perfectly dry
before admission the action of the walls takes its limit from the
condensation which expansion brings about; with steam that is
wet before admission no such limit applies. Hence the importance
of having steam that is initially dry. To secure this, no method
is so certain as to give some initial superheat to the steam, and
hence arises the practical advantage which even a small amount of
superheating is found to bring about.

47. «I»Influence of the Slide«/I»-«I»Valve«/I».—To a considerable extent the 
slide-valve itself promotes initial condensation, for it requires that 
the hot steam shall enter the cylinder through a passage which,
immediately before, was chilled by being used for the escape of
exhaust steam. The use of entirely distinct admission and exhaust
ports and valves tends towards economy of steam, partly for this
reason and partly because it allows the clearance spaces to be
reduced. Accordingly, we find that many of the best recorded
results of tests relate to engines in which each cylinder has four
separate valves of the Corliss or of the drop type. By using horizontal
cylinders with admission valves on the top and exhaust
valves below, the further advantage of drainage through the exhaust
valves is secured. Water which is present at release has then the
chance of escaping without being re-evaporated, a circumstance
which contributes largely to reduce the exchange of heat between
the working substance and the metal. Thus a horizontal triple-expansion
engine with drop valves, by Messrs Sulzer, using saturated
steam at an absolute pressure of 160 lb per sq. in., and indicating
not much more than 200 h.p., is reported, in a test by
Professor Stodola, to have used only 11·52 lb of steam per indicated
horse-power-hour (see «I»Engineer«/I», July 1, 1898; also summary of
trials by B. Donkin, ibid., Oct. 13, 1899). The performance in this
test is equivalent to nearly 69% of the ideal, an exceptionally high
figure. In one or two trials of larger engines even this performance
has been surpassed, 11·2 and 11·3 lb per horse-power-hour having
been recorded. In other particularly favourable records of trials
the consumption of steam with triple-expansion engines has been
found to lie between 12 and 13 lb per horse-power-hour. Some of
the best results relate to slow-running pumping engines fitted with
steam jackets on the barrels and on the covers of the cylinders, and
may be taken as showing how influential, in a long-period engine,
the jacket may prove in reducing the evils of initial condensation.
In the mean of several apparently authoritative trials by different
observers on different engines the consumption of steam was 12·2 lb
per horse-power-hour, at an absolute pressure of about 140 lb per
sq. in., which corresponds to 66% of the ideal performance.
It should be added that these figures are exceptional. A consumption
of 13 or 14 lb of steam per horse-power-hour is much more usual
even in large and well-designed triple-expansion engines; and with 
two-cylinder compound engines, using steam with an absolute
pressure of 100 or 120 lb per sq. in., anything from 14 to 15 lb
may be reckoned a good performance.

48. «I»Superheated Steam«/I».—The advantage of superheated steam,
which arises mainly from its influence in reducing the exchange of
heat between the steam and cylinder walls, was demonstrated by
the experiments of Hirn, and as early as 1860 it was not unusual to
supply superheaters with marine engines. But the practice of
superheating was soon abandoned, chiefly on account of difficulties
in regard to lubrication. By the introduction of heavy mineral oils
this objection has been removed, and a revival in the use of superheating
has taken place, with striking effect on the thermodynamic
economy of engines. Experiments made in 1892 by the Alsatian
Society of Steam Users on a large number of engines showed that
superheating effected an average saving in coal to the extent of
about 20%, when the superheater was simply placed in the boiler
flue, so that it utilized what would otherwise be waste heat, and
about 12% when the superheater was separately fired. In those
cases the steam was superheated only about 30° to 45° C. above the
temperature of saturation, but in more recent practice much greater
amounts of superheat have been successfully applied. Professor
Schroter has tested a factory engine of 1000 h.p., using steam superheated
by some 50° C., and has shown that this amount of superheat
is not sufficient to prevent some of the steam from becoming
condensed on the walls during admission to the cylinder («I»Zeitschrift«/I»
«I»des Vereins deutscher Ingenieure«/I», vol. xl., 1896). It follows that still
larger amounts of superheat will be thermodynamically advantageous.
That this is the case has been demonstrated by the remarkable results
which have been obtained with highly superheated steam by W.
Schmidt in stationary engines and locomotives. Using a somewhat
special design, Schmidt has shown that it is perfectly practicable to
employ steam superheated to a temperature of 400° C., and that an
efficiency not attainable from steam in any other way is thereby
reached. In several authentic trials of Schmidt engines the consumption
of steam has been considerably less than 10 lb per indicated
horse-power-hour—a figure which, after allowance is made for the
heat taken up during the process of superheating, represents a better
performance than that of the best engines using saturated or slightly
superheated steam. It has been found that the consumption of
coal, in the boiler and superheater together, need not exceed 1⅓ lb
per indicated horse-power even with engines of small power. To
attain this remarkable result it is of course necessary that, after the
hot gases from the furnace have passed the superheater, a further
extraction of heat from them should take place. This is done by an
economizer or feed-water heater of peculiar form, consisting of a long
coil of small pipes which maintain a circulation of hot distilled water
through a closed system containing an external coil, which forms the
heater of a tank through which the feed-water passes on its way to
the boiler. Some of the Schmidt engines adopt the principle of
single action, to escape the necessity of having a piston-rod and gland
on the side which is exposed to contact with high-temperature steam;
but it is found that this precaution is not essential, and that with
glands of suitable design a double-acting piston may be used without
inconvenience, and without risk of undue wear. In some instances
Schmidt transfers to the partially expanded steam in the intermediate
receiver a portion of the heat which is conveyed to the engine
by the highly superheated steam; and when this is done, the steam
may properly receive a still higher degree of initial superheat.
Accordingly, though the initial temperature of the steam may be
400° C. or more, this is reduced to about 320 by transfer to steam in
the superheater before the high-pressure steam is admitted to the
cylinder. In tests by the present writer of a Schmidt plant indicating
180 h.p., in which this device was employed, the steam
was superheated to 397° C. and 10·4 lb were used per horse-power-hour.
In this trial the temperature of the chimney gases was
reduced, by the use of Schmidt’s feed-water heater, to 175° C, and
the consumption of coal was 1·31 lb per indicated horse-power-hour.
In another trial, of a larger engine with steam superheated to 425° C,
the consumption of steam per horse-power-hour was only 9·0 lb.

49. «I»The Indicator«/I».—The actual behaviour of steam in the cylinder of a steam engine is studied by means of the indicator, which serves not only to measure the work done but to examine the operation of the valves and generally to give much useful information regarding the action of the engine. The indicator, which was invented by Watt, and improved by Richards, is a device for automatically drawing a diagram showing the pressure at all points of the piston’s stroke. In its most usual form it consists of a small steam cylinder fitted with a piston which slides easily within it and is pressed down by a spiral spring of steel wire. The cylinder of the indicator is connected by a pipe below this piston to one or other end of the cylinder of the engine, so that the piston of the indicator rises and falls in response to the fluctuations of pressure which occur in the engine cylinder. The indicator piston actuates a pencil, which rises and falls with it and traces the diagram on a sheet of paper fixed to a drum that is caused to rotate back and forth through a certain arc, in unison with the motion of the engine piston. InPAGE:852M‘Naught’s indicator the pencil is directly attached to the indicator 
piston, in Richards’s the pencil is moved by means of a system of 
links so that it copies the motion of the piston on a magnified scale. 
This has the advantage that an equally large diagram is drawn with 
much less movement of the piston, and errors which are caused 
by the piston’s inertia are consequently reduced. In high-speed 
engines especially it is important to minimize the inertia of the 
indicator piston and the parts connected with it. In Richards’s 
indicator the linkage employed to multiply the piston’s motion is 
an arrangement similar to the parallel motion introduced by Watt 
as a means of guiding the piston-rod in beam engines. In several 
recent forms of indicator lighter linkages are adopted, and other 
changes have been made with the object of fitting the instrument 
better for high-speed work. One of these modified forms of 
Richards’s indicator (the Crosby) is shown in fig. 15.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 15.png|width=326}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 15.—Crosby Indicator.«/CTR»

The pressure 
of steam in the engine cylinder raises the piston P, compressing the 
spring S and causing the pencil Q to rise in a nearly straight line
through a distance proportional, on a magnified scale, to the compression
of the spring and therefore to the pressure of the steam.
At the same time the drum D, which carries the paper, receives 
motion through the cord C from the crosshead of the engine. Inside 
this drum there is a spiral spring which becomes wound up when
the cord is pulled, and serves to turn the drum in the reverse direction
during the back stroke. The cap of the indicator cylinder has
holes in it which admit air freely to the top of the piston, and the 
piston has room to descend, extending the spring S, when the pressure 
of the steam is less than that of the atmosphere. The spring is easily 
taken out and replaced by a more or less stiff one when higher or 
lower pressures have to be dealt with. 

50. «I»Errors in Indicator Diagrams«/I».—To register correctly, an 
indicator must satisfy two conditions: (1) the motion of the piston 
must be proportional to the change of steam pressure in the engine 
cylinder: and (2) the motion of the drum must be proportional to 
that of the engine piston. 

The first of these requires that the pipe which connects the 
indicator with the cylinder should be short and of sufficient bore, 
and that it should open in the cylinder at a place where the pressure 
in it will not be affected by the kinetic action of the inrushing steam. 
Frequently pipes are led from both ends of the cylinder to a central 
position where the indicator is set, so that diagrams may be taken 
From either end without shifting the instrument; better results are 
obtained, especially when the cylinder is long, by using a pair of 
indicators, each fixed with the shortest possible connecting pipe. 
The general effect of an insufficiently free connexion between the 
indicator and the engine cylinder is to make the diagram too small. 
The first condition is also invalidated to some extent by the friction 
of the indicator piston, of the joints in the linkage, and of the pencil 
on the paper. The piston must slide very freely; nothing of the 
nature of packing is permissible, and any steam that leaks past it 
must have a free exit through the cover. The pencil pressure must 
not exceed the minimum which is necessary for clear marking. 
Another source of disturbance is the inertia of the moving parts, 
which tends to set them into oscillation whenever the indicator 
piston suffers a comparatively sudden displacement. These oscillations,
superposed upon the legitimate motions of the piston, give a 
wavy outline to parts of the diagram, especially when the speed is 
great. When they appear on the diagram a continuous curve 
should be drawn midway between the crests and hollows of the 
undulations. To keep them within reasonable compass in high-speed
work a stiff spring must be used and an indicator with light 
parts should be selected. Care must be taken that the spring is 
graduated to suit the temperature (about 100° C.) to which it is 
exposed when in use;. its stiffness at this temperature is about 3% 
less than when cold. 

51. «I»Measurement of Horse-Power«/I».—To determine the indicated 
horse-power, the mean effective pressure is found by dividing the 
area of the diagram by the length of its base. This gives a mean 
height, which, interpreted on the scale of pressures, is the mean 
effective pressure in pounds per square inch., This has to be multiplied
by the effective area of the piston in square inches and by the 
length of the piston stroke in feet to find the work done per stroke 
in foot-pounds on that side of the piston to which the diagram refers.
Let A₁ be the area of the piston on one side and A₂ on the other; 
𝑝₁ and 𝑝₂ the mean effective pressures on the two sides respectively; 
L the length of the stroke in feet; and 𝑛 the number of complete 
double strokes or revolutions per minute. Then the indicated 
horse-power 

«CTR»I.H.P.=𝑛L(𝑝₁A₁+𝑝₂A₂)/33000.«/CTR»

In finding the mean pressure the area of the diagram may be 
conveniently measured by a planimeter. A less accurate plan, 
frequently followed, is to divide the diagram by lines drawn at 
the middle of strips of equal width and to take the mean pressure 
as the average height of these lines. 

52. «I»Tests of Efficiency«/I».—In testing the actual efficiency of an 
engine the work done as determined by the indicator is compared 
with the supply of heat, which is calculated from the amount of 
steam passing through the engine. We may find the amount of 
steam passing through either by measuring the feed-water or, when 
a surface condenser is used, by collecting the condensed water from 
the air-pump discharge and measuring that, adding the water 
drained from jackets if any are used. In some trials both of these 
measurements have been made, and it has been found that in general 
the amount of feed-water exceeds the amount of steam discharged 
from air-pump and jackets by something like 3 or 4%, a discrepancy
due to leakages in the boiler and the engine. The results 
of tests are generally stated by giving the number of pounds of steam 
used per horse-power-hour, or by giving the work done by each 
pound of steam, a quantity which is directly comparable with the 
amount of work ideally obtainable, if the engine followed the perfect 
Rankine cycle already discussed. To make a complete engine trial 
the engine is caused to work not only at full power, but at various 
fractions of its greatest load. The results are very conveniently 
represented (in a manner due to P. W. Willans) by drawing a curve, 
the co-ordinates of which are the horse-power and the total consumption
of steam per hour. This “Willans Line,” as it is called, is in
most cases straight or nearly straight. Another useful curve is 
drawn by plotting the steam used per horse-power-hour in relation 
to the horse-power. 

53. «I»Determination of the«/I» “«I»Missing Quantity«/I».”—When the amount 
of steam passing through the engine is known, the indicator diagram enables the degree of wetness of the steam to be estimated at various stages in the expansion from cut-off to release, provided there is no direct passage from steam-chest to exhaust, such as has been referred to above in connexion with Messrs Callendar and Nicolson’s researches. For this purpose we must first calculate the quantity of the working substance present in the cylinder. It is made up of two parts, namely, the amount supplied per stroke, plus the amount retained by being shut up in the clearance space. If we assume, as may generally be done without serious error, that at the beginning of compression the steam present in the cylinder is dry, it is an easy matter to deduce from the diagram, knowing the pressure and the volume, how much steam is shut up in the clearance. Adding that to the supply per stroke, we get the whole quantity that is present from cut-off to release. The volume which this would occupy at each pressure, if saturated, is found from the steam table. The volume actually occupied at each pressure is found from the diagram, and by comparing the two it is easy to infer how much of the substance exists as water and how much as steam. The ratio of the two volumes measures with sufficient accuracy the dryness of the steam. Any direct leakage from the steam side to the exhaust side of the valve will invalidate this calculation, which proceeds. On the basis that all the steam passing through the engine passes through the cylinder. 

54. «I»Compound Engines«/I».—In the original form of compound engine, 
invented by Hornblower and revived by Woolf, steam passed 
directly from the first to the second cylinder; the exhaust from the first and admission to the second went on together throughout the whole of the back stroke. This arrangement is possible only when the high and low pressure pistons begin and end their strokes 
together, as in engines of the “tandem” type, whose high and low 
pressure cylinders are in one line, with one piston-rod common to 
both pistons. Engines in which the high and low pressure cylinders 
are placed side by side, and act either on the same crank or on 
cranks set at 180° apart, may also discharge steam directly from one to the other cylinder; the same remark applies to beam engines, whether of the class in which both pistons act on one end of the beam, or of the class introduced by M‘Naught, in which the high and low pressure cylinders stand on opposite sides of the centre. By aPAGE:853convenient usage which is now pretty general the name “Woolf 
engine” is restricted to those compound engines which discharge 
steam directly from the high to the low pressure cylinders without 
the use of an intermediate receiver. 

55. «I»Receiver Engine«/I».—An intermediate receiver becomes necessary 
when the phases of the pistons in a compound engine do not agree 
With two cranks at right angles, for example, a portion of the 
discharge from the high-pressure cylinder occurs at a time when the 
low-pressure cylinder cannot properly receive steam. The receiver 
is in some cases an entirely independent vessel connected to the 
cylinders by pipes; very often, however, a sufficient amount of 
receiver volume is afforded by the valve casings and the steam pipe 
which connects the cylinders. The receiver, when it is a distinct 
vessel, is frequently jacketed. 

A receiver is frequently applied with advantage to beam and 
tandem compound engines Communication need not then be 
maintained between the high and low pressure cylinders during the 
whole of the stroke, admission to the low-pressure cylinder is stopped 
before the stroke is completed; the steam already admitted is allowed 
to expand independently; and the remainder of the discharge from 
the high-pressure cylinder is compressed into the intermediate 
receiver. Each cylinder has then a definite point of cut-off, and by 
varying these points the distribution of work between the two 
cylinders may be adjusted at will. In general it is desirable to make 
both cylinders of a compound engine contribute equal quantities of 
work. If they act on separate cranks this has the effect of giving 
the same value to the mean twisting moment of both cranks. 

56. «I»Compound Diagrams«/I».—Wherever a receiver is used, care 
should be taken that there should not be a wasteful amount of 
unresisted expansion into it; in other words, the pressure in the 
receiver should be not greatly less than that in the high-pressure 
cylinder at the moment of release. If the receiver pressure is less 
there will be what is termed “drop” in the steam pressure between 
the high-pressure cylinder and the receiver, which will show itself 
in an indicator diagram by a sudden fall at the end of the high-pressure
expansion. This “drop” is, from the thermodynamic 
point of view, irreversible, and therefore wasteful. It can be avoided 
by selecting a proper point of cut-off in the low-pressure cylinder. 
When there is no “drop” the expansion that occurs in a compound 
engine has precisely the same effect in doing work as the same amount 
of expansion in a simple engine would have, provided the law of 
expansion be the same in both and the waste of energy which occurs 
by the friction of ports and passages in the transfer of steam from 
one to the other cylinder be negligible. The work done in either 
case depends merely on the relation of pressure to volume throughout 
the process; and so long as that relation is unchanged it is a matter 
of indifference whether the expansion be performed in one vessel or 
in more than one. In general a compound engine has a thermodynamic
advantage over a simple engine using the same pressure 
and the same expansion, inasmuch as it reduces the exchange of 
heat between the working substance and the cylinder walls and so 
makes the process of expansion more nearly adiabatic. The compound
engine has also a mechanical advantage which will be presently
described. The ultimate ratio of expansion in any compound «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:250px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 16.png|width=250}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 16.—Compound Diagrams:«BR»Woolf type.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
engine is the ratio of the volume of the low-pressure cylinder to the 
volume of steam admitted to 
the high-pressure cylinder. 
Fig. 16 illustrates the combined
action of the two cylinders
in a hypothetical compound engine of the Woolf 
type, in which for simplicity 
the effect of clearance is neglected
and also the loss 
of pressure which the steam 
undergoes in transfer from one to the other cylinder. ABCD 
is the indicator diagram of the high-pressure cylinder. The exhaust 
line CD shows a falling pressure in consequence of the increase of 
volume which the steam is then undergoing through the advance 
of the low-pressure piston. EFGH is the diagram of the low-pressure
cylinder drawn alongside of the other for convenience in the construction
which follows. It has no point of cut-off; its admission line
is the continuous curve of expansion EF, which is the same as the 
high-pressure exhaust line CD, but drawn to a different scale of 
volumes. At any point K, the actual volume of the steam is 
KL + MN. By drawing OP equal to KL + MN, so that OP 
represents the whole volume, and repeating the same construction 
at other points of the diagram, we 
may set out the curve QPR, the upper 
part of which is identical with BC, 
and so complete a single diagram 
which exhibits the equivalent expansion
in a single cylinder. 

In a tandem compound engine of the 
receiver type the diagrams resemble 
those shown in fig. 17. During CD 
(which corresponds to FG) expansion 
is taking place into the large or low-pressure 
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:200px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 17.png|width=200}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 17.—Compound Dia­grams: Receiver type.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
cylinder. D and G mark
the point of cut-off in the large cylinder, after which GH shows the
independent expansion of the steam now shut within the large 
cylinder, and DE shows the compression of steam by continued 
discharge from the small cylinder into the receiver. At the end of 
the stroke the receiver pressure is OE, and if there is to be no “drop,” 
this must be the same as the pressure at C. Diagrams of a similar 
kind may be sketched without difficulty for the case of a receiver 
engine with any assigned phase relation between the pistons. 

57. «I»Adjustment of Work and«/I» “«I»Drop«/I».”—By making the cut-off 
take place earlier in the large cylinder we increase the mean pressure 
in the receiver; the work done in the small cylinder is consequently 
diminished. The work done in the large cylinder is correspondingly 
increased, for the total work (depending as it does on the initial 
pressure and the total ratio of expansion) is unaffected by the change. 
The same adjustment serves, in case there is “drop,” to lessen it.
By selecting a suitable ratio of cylinder volumes to one another and 
to the volume of the receiver, and also by choosing a proper point 
for the low-pressure cut-off, it is possible to divide the work suitably 
between the cylinders and at the same time prevent the amount of 
drop from being greater than is practically convenient. 

58. Uniformity of Effort in a Compound Engine.—An important 
mechanical advantage belongs to the compound engine in the fact 
that it avoids the extreme thrust and pull which would have to be 
borne by the piston-rod of a single-cylinder engine working at the 
same power with the same initial pressure and the same ratio of 
expansion. If all the expansion took place in the low-pressure 
cylinder, the piston at the beginning of the stroke would be exposed 
to a thrust much greater than the sum of the thrusts on the two 
pistons of a compound engine in which a fair proportion of the 
expansion is performed in the small cylinder. The mean thrust 
throughout the stroke in a tandem engine is of course not affected 
by compounding; only the range of variation in the thrust is reduced. 
The effort on the crank-pin is consequently made more uniform, 
the strength of the parts may be reduced, and the friction at slides 
and journals is lessened. The advantage in this respect is obviously 
much greater when the cylinders are placed side by side, instead of 
tandem, and work on cranks at right angles. As a set-off to its 
advantage in giving a more uniform effort, the compound engine 
has the drawback of requiring more working parts than a simple 
engine with one cylinder. But in many instances—as in marine 
engines—two or more Cranks are almost indispensable to give a 
tolerably uniform effort' and to get over the dead points; and the 
comparison should then be made between a pair of simple cylinders 
and a pair of compounded cylinders. Another point in favour of 
the compound engine is that, although the whole ratio of expansion 
is great, there need not be a very early cut-off in either cylinder; 
hence the common slide-valve, which is unsuited to give an early 
cut-off, may be used in place of a more complex arrangement. The 
mechanical advantage of the compound engine has long been 
recognized, and had much to do with its adoption in the early days 
of high-pressure steam. Its subsequent development has been due 
in part to this, and in part to the thermodynamic advantage which 
has been discussed above. 

59. «I»Ratio of Cylinder Volumes«/I».—In a two-cylinder compound 
engine, using steam at 80 to 100 lb pressure, the large cylinder has 
3 or 4 times the volume of the small cylinder. In triple engines 
the pressure is rarely less than 150 lb; the low-pressure cylinder has 
generally 6 or 7 times, and the intermediate cylinder 2½ to 2¾ times 
the volume of the high-pressure cylinder. In naval practice the 
ratios are about 1: 2¼: 5 for a pressure of 160 lb and 1: 2·6: 7 for a 
pressure of 250 lb. In the mercantile marine the engines are normally
working at full power, whereas in the navy most of the working 
is at greatly reduced powers, the cruising speed requiring very much 
less than the full output. Consequently, for the same boiler pressure, 
the cylinder ratio is made less in war-ships to adapt the engines for 
economical working under cruising conditions. 

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 18.png|width=380}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 18.—Horizontal Section through Cylinder and Valve-chest:«BR»
showing Slide-valve.«/CTR»

60. «I»The Distribution of Steam«/I».—In early steam engines the distribution of steam was effected by means of conical valves, worked by 
tappets from a rod which hung from the beam. The slide-valve, 
the invention of which in the form now known as the long D-slide 
is credited to Murdock, an assistant of Watt, came into general 
use with the introduction of locomotives, and is now employed, in 
one or other of many forms, in the great majority of engines. 

The common slide-valve is illustrated in fig. 18, which also showsPAGE:854the cylinder and the ports and passages leading to its ends. The 
seat, or surface on which the valve slides, is a plane surface formed 
on or fixed to the side of the cylinder, with three ports or openings 
which extend across the greater part of the cylinder’s width. The
central opening is the exhaust port through which the steam
escapes; the others, or steam ports, which are narrower, lead to the 
two ends of the cylinder respectively. The valve is a box-shaped 
cover which slides over the seat, and the whole is enclosed in a 
chamber called the valve-chest, to which steam from the boiler is 
admitted. When the valve moves a sufficient distance to either 
side of the central position, steam enters one end of the cylinder 
from the valve-chest and escapes from the other end of the cylinder 
through the cavity of the valve into the exhaust port. The valve 
is generally moved by an eccentric on the engine shaft, which is 
mechanically equivalent to a crank whose radius is equal to the «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:120px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 19.png|width=120}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 19.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
eccentricity, or distance from the centre of the shaft to the centre 
of the eccentric sheave. The eccentric rod is generally so long that 
the motion of the valve is sensibly the same as that which it would 
receive were the rod infinitely long. Thus if 
a circle (fig. 19) be drawn to represent the path 
of the eccentric centre during a revolution of 
the engine, and a perpendicular PM be drawn 
from any point P on a diameter AB, the distance 
CM is the displacement of the valve from its 
middle position at the time when the eccentric 
centre is at P. AB is the whole travel of the 
valve. 

61. «I»Lap and Lead«/I».—If the valve when in its 
middle position did not overlap the steam ports (fig. 20), any 
movement to the right or the left would admit steam, and 
the admission would continue until the valve had returned to 
its middle position, or, in other words, for half a revolution of 
the engine. Such a valve would not serve for expansive 
working, and as regards the relative position of the crank and 
eccentric it would have to be set so that its middle position 
coincided with the extreme position of the piston; in other words, 
the eccentric radius would make a right angle with the crank.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto;line-height:110%"><tr><td colspan="3">{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 20-21.png|width=320}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 20.—Slide-Valve«BR»without Lap.</td><td></td><td style="padding-left:2em">«SC»Fig«/SC». 21.—Slide-Valve«BR»with Lap.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
Expansive working, however, becomes possible when we give the 
valve what is called “lap,” by making it project over the edges of 
the steam ports, as in fig. 21, where is the “outside lap” and 𝑖 is 
the “inside lap.” Admission of steam (to either side) then begins 
only when the displacement of the valve from its middle position 
exceeds the amount of the outside lap, and continues only until the 
valve has returned to the same distance from its middle position. 
Further, exhaust begins only when the valve has moved past the 
middle by a distance equal to 𝑖, and continues until the valve has
again returned to a distance 𝑖 from its middle position. Thus on
the diagram of the eccentric’s travel
(fig. 22) we find, by setting off 𝑜 and 𝑖 «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:140px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 22.png|width=140}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 22.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
on the two sides of the centre, the positions
𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 and 𝑑 of the eccentric radius
at which the four events of admission, 
cut-off, release and compression occur 
for one side of the piston. As to the 
other side of the piston, it is only necessary
to set off 𝑜 to the right and 𝑖 to the
left of the centre, but for the sake of
clearness we may confine our attention
to one of the two sides. Of the whole
revolution, the part from 𝑎 to 𝑏 is the
arc of steam admission, from 𝑏 to 𝑐 is
the arc of expansion, from 𝑐 to 𝑑 the arc of exhaust, and from 𝑑 to
𝑎 the arc of compression. The relation of these, however, to the
piston’s motion is still undefined. If the eccentric were set in
advance of the crank by an angle equal to AC𝑎, the opening of the
valve would be coincident with the beginning of the piston’s stroke.
It is, however, desirable, in order to allow the steam free entry, that
the valve be already some way open when the piston stroke begins,
and thus the eccentric may be set to have a position C𝑎′ at the beginning
of the stroke. In that case the valve is open at the beginning
of the stroke to the extent 𝑚𝑚′, which is called the “lead.” The
amount by which the angle between C𝑎′ (the eccentric) and CA (the
crank) exceeds a right angle is called the «I»angular advance«/I», this being
the angle by which the eccentric is set in advance of the position it
would occupy if the primitive arrangement without lap were adopted.
The quantities lap, lead and angular advance (θ) are connected by
the equation 

«CTR»outside lap+lead=half travel × cos θ.«/CTR»
An effect of lead is to cause «I»preadmission«/I», that is to say, admission
before the end of the back stroke, which, together with the
compression of steam left in the cylinder when the exhaust port
closes, produces the mechanical effect of “cushioning,” to which
reference has already been made. To examine the distribution of
steam throughout the piston’s stroke, we may now draw a circle to
represent the path of the crank pin (fig. 23, where the dotted lines
have been added to show the assumed configuration of piston, connecting-rod
and crank) and transfer to it from the former diagram
the angular positions 𝑎, 𝑏, 𝑐 and 𝑑 at which the four events occur.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 23.png|width=320}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 23.«/CTR»

To facilitate this transfer the diagrams of eccentric path and of 
crank-pin path may by a suitable choice of scales be drawn of the 
same actual size. Then by projecting these points on a diameter 
which represents the piston’s path, by circular arcs drawn with a 
radius equal to the length of the connecting-rod, we find 𝑝, the 
position of the piston at which admission
occurs during the back stroke,
also 𝑞 and 𝑟, the position at cut-off 
and release, during the stroke which 
takes place in the direction of the 
arrow, and 𝑠, the point at which 
compression begins. It is obviously
unnecessary to draw the two circles 
of figs. 22 and 23 separately; the 
single diagram (fig. 24) contains the 
solution of the steam distribution with 
a slide-valve whose laps, travel and 
angular advance are known, the same circle serving, on two scales, 
to show the motion of the crank and of the eccentric. 

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 24.png|width=180}}</td><td></td><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 25.png|width=110}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 24.</td><td></td><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 25.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
«I»Zeuner’s Diagram«/I».—The graphic construction most usually 
employed in slide-valve investigations is the ingenious diagram 
published by Dr G. Zeuner in the «I»Civilingenieur«/I» in 1856.«FN[832f1]:Zeuner, «I»Treatise on Valve Gears«/I», trans, by M. Müller (1868).«/FN» On the 
line AB (fig. 25), which represents the travel of 
the valve, let a pair of circles (called valve-circles)
be drawn, each with diameter equal 
to the half travel. A radius vector CP, drawn 
in the direction of the eccentric at any instant, 
is cut by one of the circles at Q, so that CQ represents
the corresponding displacement of the 
valve from its middle position. That this is so 
will be seen by drawing PM (as in fig. 19) and
joining QB, when it is obvious that CQ=CM, 
which is the displacement of the valve. The line AB with the circle 
on it may now be turned back through an angle of 90°+θ (θ being the 
angular advance), so that the valve-circles take the position shown 
to a larger scale in fig. 26.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 26.png|width=380}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 26.—Zeuner’s Slide-Valve Diagram.«/CTR»

This makes the direction of CQ (the 
eccentric) coincide on the paper with the simultaneous direction ofPAGE:855the crank, and hence to find the displacement of the valve at any 
position of the crank we have only to draw CQ in fig. 26 parallel
to the crank, when CQ represents the«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:160px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 27.png|width=160}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 27.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
displacement of the valve to the scale
on which the diameter of each valve
circle represents the half-travel of the
valve. CQ₀ is the valve displacement
at the beginning of the stroke shown
by the arrow. Draw circular arcs 𝑎𝑏
and 𝑐𝑑 with C as centre and with radii
equal to the outside lap and the
inside lap 𝑖 respectively. C𝑎 is the
position of the crank at which preadmission
occurs. The lead is 𝑎₀Q₀.
The greatest steam opening is 𝑎₁B.
The cut-off occurs when the crank has
the direction C𝑏. C𝑐 is the position
of the crank at release, and C𝑑 marks the end of the exhaust.

63. In this diagram radii drawn from C mark the angular positions
of the crank and their intercepts by the valve circles determine 
the corresponding displacement of the valve. It remains to find the
corresponding displacement of the piston. For this Zeuner employs
a supplementary graphic construction, shown in fig. 27. Here 𝑎𝑏
or 𝑎′𝑏′ represents the connecting rod, and 𝑏𝑐 or 𝑏′𝑐 the crank. With
centre 𝑐 and radius 𝑎𝑐 a circle 𝑎𝑝 is drawn, and with centre 𝑏 and
radius 𝑎𝑏 another circle 𝑎𝑞. Then for any position of the crank, as
𝑐𝑏′, the intercept 𝑝𝑞 between the circles is easily seen to be equal to
𝑎𝑎′, and is therefore the distance by which the piston has moved
from its extreme position at the beginning of the stroke. In practice
this diagram is combined with that of fig. 26, by drawing both about
the same centre and using different scales for valve and piston travel
A radius vector drawn from the centre parallel to the crank in any
position then shows the valve’s displacement from the valve’s
middle position by the intercept CQ of fig. 26, and the piston’s
displacement from the beginning of the piston’s motion by the
intercept 𝑝𝑞 of fig. 27.

64. In the figures which have been sketched the events refer 
to the front end of the cylinder, that is, the end nearest to the crank
(see fig. 23). To determine the events of steam distribution at the
back end, the lap circles shown by dotted lines in fig. 26 must
also be drawn, C𝑎′ being the outside lap for the back end, and C𝑐′
the inside lap. These laps are not necessarily equal to those at the
other end of the valve. From the diagrams it will be seen that,
especially with a short connecting-rod, the cut-off and release occur
earlier and the compression later at the front than at the back end
if the laps are equal, and a more symmetrical steam distribution can
be produced by making the inside lap greater and the outside lap
less on the side which leads to the front end of the cylinder On
the other hand, an unsymmetrical distribution may be desirable
as in a vertical engine, where the weight of the piston assists the
steam during the down-stroke and resists it during the up-stroke
and this may be secured by a suitable inequality in the laps

65. By varying the ratio of the laps 𝑜 and 𝑖 to the travel of the
valve, we produce effects on the steam distribution which are
readily traced by means of the diagram. Reduction of travel
(which is equivalent to increase of both 𝑜 and 𝑖) gives later preadmission,
earlier cut-off, later release and earlier compression; the
ratios of expansion and of compression are both increased. Increase
of angular advance accelerates all the events and causes a slight
increase in the ratio of expansion.

66. In designing a slide-valve the breadth of the steam ports
in the direction of the valve’s motion is determined with reference
to the volume of the exhaust steam to be discharged in a given time
the area of the ports being generally such that the mean velocity
of the steam during discharge is less than 100 ft. per second The
travel is made great enough to keep the cylinder port fully open
during the greater part of the exhaust; for this purpose it is 2½ or 3 times the breadth of the steam port. To facilitate the exit of steam the inside lap is always small, and is often wanting or even
«I»negative«/I». During admission the steam port is rarely quite uncovered,
especially if the outside lap is large and the travel moderate.
Large travel has the advantage of giving freer ingress and egress of
steam, with more sharply-defined cut-off, compression and release
but this advantage is secured at the cost of more work spent in
moving the valve and more wear of the faces. To lessen the necessary
travel without reducing the area of steam ports, double-ported
valves are often used. An example is shown below in fig. 39.

67. «I»Reversal of Motion with Slide«/I»-«I»Valve«/I».—The eccentric must
stand in advance of the crank by the angle 90° + θ, as in fig. 28, where CK is the crank, and CE the corresponding
position of the eccentric when the engine is running
in the direction of the arrow 𝑎. To set the engine«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:80px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 28.png|width=80}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 28.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
in gear to run in the opposite direction (𝑏) it is
only necessary to shift the eccentric into the position
CE′ when it will still be 90° + θ in advance of the
crank. In the older engines this reversal was effected
by temporarily disengaging the eccentric-rod from the valve-rod,
working the valve by hand until the crank turned back through
an angle equal to ECE′, the eccentric meanwhile remaining
at rest, and then re-engaging the gear.
instead of being keyed to the shaft,
fixed to the shaft, which abutted on
shoulders projecting from the sheave.
reversing gear means are provided for turning the eccentric round
on the shaft, but the arrangement known as the link-motion is now
the most usual gear in locomotive, marine, winding and other
engines which require to be often and easily reversed.

68. «I»Link«/I»-«I»Motion«/I».—In the link-motion two eccentrics are used,
and the ends of their rods are connected by a link. In Stephenson’s
link-motion—the earliest and still the most usual form—the link
is a slotted bar or pair of bars curved to the same radius as the
eccentric rods (fig. 29), and capable of being shifted up or down by
a suspension rod. The valve-rod ends in a block which slides within
the link, and when the link is placed so that this block is nearly in
line with the forward eccentric rod (R. fig. 29) the valve moves in
nearly the same way as if it were driven directly by a single eccentric.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 29.png|width=360}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 29.—Stephenson’s Link-Motion.«/CTR»

This is the position of “full forward gear.” In “full backward
gear,” on the other hand, the link is pulled up until the block is in
nearly a line with the backward eccentric rod R′. The link-motion
thus gives a ready means of reversing the engine—but it does more
than this. By setting the link in an intermediate position the valve
receives a motion nearly the same as that which would be given by
an eccentric of shorter radius and of greater angular advance, and
the effect is to give a distribution of steam in which the cut-off is
earlier than in full gear, and the expansion and compression are
greater. In mid gear the steam distribution is such that scarcely
any work is done in the cylinder. The movement of the link, is
effected by a hand-lever, or by a screw, or (in large engines) by
an auxiliary steam engine. A usual arrangement of hand-lever,
sketched in fig. 29, has given rise to the phrase “notching up,”
to describe the setting of the link to give a greater degree of expansion.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 30.png|width=310}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 30.—Gooch’s Link-Motion.«/CTR»

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 31.png|width=360}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 31.—Allan’s Link-Motion.«/CTR»

In Gooch’s link-motion (fig. 30) the link is not moved up in
shifting from forward to backward gear, but a radius rod between
the valve-rod and the link (which is curved to suit this radius rod)
is raised or lowered—a plan which has the advantage that the lead
is the same in all gears. In Allan’s motion (fig. 31) the change of
gear is effected partly by shifting the link and partly by shifting
a radius rod, and the link is straight.

69. «I»Graphic Solution of Link«/I»-«I»Motion«/I».—The movement of a valve
driven by a link-motion may be very fully and exactly analysed by
drawing with the aid of a template the positions of the centre line
of the link corresponding to a number of successive positions of the
crank. Thus, in fig. 32, two circular arcs passing through 𝑒 and 𝑒′
are drawn with E and E′ as centres and the eccentric rods are radii.
These are loci of two known points of the link, and a third locus is
the circle 𝑎 in which the point of suspension must lie. By placing
on the paper a template of the link, with these three points markedPAGE:856on it, the position of the link is readily found, and by repeating the 
process for other positions of the eccentrics a diagram of positions 
(fig. 32) is drawn for the assigned state of the gear. A line AB 
drawn across this diagram in the path of the valve’s travel determines
the displacements of the valve, and enables the oval diagram 
to be drawn, which is shown to a larger scale in another part of fig. 
32. The example refers to Stephenson’s link-motion in nearly full 
forward gear; with obvious modification the same method may be 
used in the analysis of Gooch’s or Allan’s motion.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 32.png|width=380}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 32.«/CTR»
The same 
diagram determines the amount of slotting or sliding motion of the 
block in the link. In a well-designed gear this sliding is reduced to 
a minimum for that position of the gear in which the engine runs 
most usually. In marine engines the suspension-rod is generally 
connected to the link at the end of the link next the forward eccentric,
to reduce this sliding when the engine is in forward gear. 

70.—«I»Radial Gears«/I».—Many forms of gear for reversing and for 
Varying expansion have been devised with the object of escaping the «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:225px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 33.png|width=225}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 33.—Hackworth’s Valve-Gear.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
use of two eccentrics, and in some both eccentrics are dispensed with. 
Hackworth’s gear, the parent of several others, to which the general 
name of radial gears is 
applied, has a single eccentric
E (fig. 33) opposite the 
crank, with an eccentric-rod 
EQ, whose mean position is 
perpendicular to the travel of 
the valve. The rod ends in 
a block Q, which slides on a 
fixed inclined guide-bar or 
link, and the valve-rod receives
its motion through a 
connecting rod from an intermediate
point P of the eccentric-rod,
the locus of which 
is an ellipse. To reverse the 
gear the guide-bar is tilted 
over to the position shown 
by the dotted lines, and 
intermediate inclinations give 
various degrees of expansion 
without altering the lead. 
The steam distribution is 
quite satisfactory, but an 
objection to the gear is the 
wear of the sliding-block and guide. In Bremme’s or Marshall’s 
form this objection is obviated with some loss of symmetry 
in the valve’s motion by constraining the motion of the point 
Q, not by a sliding-guide, but a suspension-link, which makes 
the path of Q a circular arc instead of a straight line; 
to reverse the gear the centre of suspension R of this link 
is thrown over to the position R′ (fig. 34). In the example 
sketched P is beyond Q, but P may be between Q and the crank 
(as in fig. 33), in which case the eccentric is set at 180° from the 
crank. This gear has been applied in a number of marine 
engines. In Joy’s gear, which is extensively used in locomotives, 
no eccentric is required; and the rod corresponding to the 
eccentric rod in Hackworth’s gear receives its motion from a 
point in the connecting rod by the linkage shown in fig. 35, and is 
either suspended, as in Marshall’s form, by a rod whose suspension 
centre R is thrown over to reverse the motion, or constrained, as 
in Hackworth’s, by a slot-guide whose inclination is reversed. Fig. 
36 shows Joy’s gear as applied to a locomotive. A slot-guide E is 
used, and it is curved to allow for the obliquity of the valve connecting-rod AE.
C is the crank-pin, B the piston path and D a fixed 
centre. 

A form of radial gear very largely used in locomotives, especially 
on the continent of Europe, is the Walschaert or Heusinger-Waldegg
gear, in which the valve receives its motion in part 
from the piston cross-head through a reducing lever, and in 
part from a single eccentric set at right angles to the crank, 
which actuates a rocking link. Reversing is effected by shifting 
a sliding block along this rocking link from one side to the other 
of the centre on which it rocks.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 34.png|width=250}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 34.—Bremme’s or Marshall’s Valve-Gear.«/CTR»

71. «I»Separate Expansion«/I»-«I»Valves«/I».—When the distribution of steam 
is effected by the slide-valve alone the arc of the crank’s motion 
during which compression occurs is equal to the arc during which 
expansion occurs, and for this reason the slide-valve would give an 
excessive amount of compression if it were made to cut off the supply 
of steam earlier than about half-stroke. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 35.png|width=255}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 35.—Diagram of Joy’s Valve-Gear.«/CTR»

Hence, where an early 
cut-off is wanted it is necessary either to use an entirely different 
means of regulating the distribution of steam, or to supplement the 
slide-valve by another valve—called an expansion-valve, usually 
driven by a separate eccentric—whose function is to effect the cut-off,
the other events being determined as usual by the slide-valve.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 36.png|width=350}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 36.—Joy’s Gear as applied to a Locomotive.«/CTR» 

Such expansion-valves belong generally to one or other of two types. 
In one the expansion-valve cuts off the supply of steam to the chest 
In which the main valve works. 

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 37.png|width=285}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 37.—Expansion-Valve on back of Main Slide-Valve.«/CTR»

In the other the expansion-valve slides on the back of the main «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:125px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 38.png|width=125}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 38.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
slide-valve, which is provided with through ports which the expansion-valve
opens and closes. Fig. 37 shows 
one form of this type. Here the resultant 
relative motion of the expansion-valve and 
main-valve has to be considered. If 𝑟𝑎 and 
𝑟 (fig. 38) are the eccentrics working the 
main and expansion valves respectively, then 
CR drawn equal and parallel to ME is the 
«I»resultant«/I» eccentric which determines the 
motion of the expansion-valve relatively 
to the main-valve. Cut-off occurs at Q, 
when the shaft has turned through anPAGE:857angle φ, which brings the resultant eccentric into the direction CQ 
and makes the relative displacement of the two valves equal to 
the distance 𝑙. 

Expansion-valves furnish a convenient means of «I»varying«/I» the 
expansion, which may be done by altering their lap, travel or angular 
advance. Alteration of lap, or rather of the distance 𝑙 in the figures, 
is often effected by having the expansion-valve in two parts (as in 
fig. 37) and holding them on one rod by right- and left-handed screws 
respectively; by turning the valve-rod the parts are made to approach 
or recede from each other. In large valves the adjustment is more 
conveniently made by varying the travel of the valve, which is done 
by connecting it to its eccentric through a link which serves as a 
lever of variable length. 
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:95px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 39.png|width=70}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 39.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
72. «I»Relief Rings«/I».—To relieve the pressure of the valve on the seat, 
large slide-valves are generally fitted with a steam-tight ring, which 
excludes steam from the greater part of the back of 
the valve. The ring fits steam-tight into a recess in 
the cover of the steam-chest, and is pressed by springs 
against the back of the valve, which is planed smooth 
to slide under the ring. Fig. 39 shows a relief ring 
of this kind fitted on the back of a large double-ported
slide-valve for a marine engine. Another 
plan is to fit the ring into a recess on the back of the 
valve, and let it slide on the inside of the steam-chest
cover. Steam is thus excluded from the space 
within the ring, any steam that leaks in being allowed 
to escape to the condenser (or to the intermediate 
receiver when the arrangement is fitted to the high-pressure
cylinder of a compound engine). A flexible 
diaphragm has also been used, instead of a recess, 
to hold the ring. 

73. «I»Piston Slide«/I»-«I»Valve«/I».—The pressure of valves on 
cylinder faces is still more completely obviated by 
making the back of the valve similar to its face, and 
causing the back to slide in contact with the valve-chest
cover, which has recesses corresponding to the cylinder 
ports. This arrangement is most perfectly carried out in the 
slide-valves now very largely used in the high-pressure 
cylinders of marine engines. The piston 
slide-valve may be described as a slide-valve
in which the valve face is curved 
to form a complete cylinder, round whose 
whole circumference the ports extend. 
The pistons are packed like ordinary 
cylinder pistons by metallic rings, and 
the ports are crossed here and there by 
diagonal bars to keep the rings from 
springing out as the valve moves over 
them. Fig. 40 shows a form of piston 
valve for the supply of high-pressure 
steam to a large marine engine. P, P are 
the cylinder ports. 
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:165px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 40.png|width=150}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 40.—Piston«BR»Slide-Valve.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
74. «I»Balance Piston«/I».—Fig. 39 illustrates 
an arrangement common in all heavy 
slide-valves whose travel is vertical—the 
balance piston, which Is pressed up by 
steam on its lower side and so equilibrates
the weight of the valve, valve-rod 
and connected parts of the mechanism. 

The valve sometimes takes the form 
of a rocking cylinder. This last kind of 
sliding motion is very usual in stationary 
engines fitted with Corliss gear, in which 
case four distinct rocking slides are commonly
employed to effect the steam 
distribution, one giving admission and 
one giving exhaust at each end of the 
cylinder. 

75. «I»Double«/I»-«I»Beat Valve«/I».—In many 
stationary engines, especially on the continent
of Europe, lift or mushroom valves 
are used, worked by tappets, cams or 
eccentrics. Lift-valves are generally of 
the Cornish or double-beat type (fig. 41), 
in which equilibrium is secured by the use of two conical faces 
which open or close together. In Cornish pumping engines, which 
retain the single action of Watt’s early engine, three double-beat 
valves are used, as steam-valve, equilibrium-valve and exhaust-valve
respectively. These are closed by tappets on a rod moving 
with the beam, but are opened by means of a device called a 
cataract, which acts as follows: The cataract is a small pump 
with a weighted plunger, discharging fluid through a stop-cock 
which can be adjusted by hand when it is desired to alter the speed 
of the engine. The weighted plunger is raised by a rod from the 
beam, but is free in its descent, so that it comes down at a rate 
depending on the extent to which the stop-cock is opened. When 
it comes down a certain way it opens the steam and exhaust valves, 
by liberating catches which hold them closed; the “out-door” 
stroke then begins and admission continues until the steam-valve 
is closed: this is done directly by the motion of the beam, which 
also, at a later point in the stroke, closes the exhaust. Then the 
equilibrium-valve is opened, and the “in-door” stroke takes place, 
during which the plunger of the cataract
is raised. When it is completed, 
the piston pauses until the cataract 
causes the steam-valve to open and 
the next “out-door” stroke begins. 
By applying a cataract to the equilibrium-valve
also, a pause is introduced
at the end of the “out-door” 
stroke. Pauses have the advantage 
of giving the pump time to fill and 
of allowing the pump-valves to settle
in their seats without shock.

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right;width:200px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 41.png|align=right|width=180}}</td></tr><tr><td style="text-align:right">«SC»Fig«/SC». 41.—Double-Beat Lift Valve.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
76. «I»Methods of Regulating«/I».—To 
make an engine run steadily an 
almost continuous process of adjustment
must go on, by which the 
amount of work done by the steam in the cylinder is adapted to 
the amount of external work demanded of the engine. Even in 
cases where the demand for work is sensibly uniform, fluctuations 
in boiler-pressure still make regulation necessary. Generally the 
process of government aims at regularity of speed; occasionally, 
however, it is some other condition of running that is maintained 
constant, as when an engine driving a dynamo-electric machine is 
governed by an electric regulator to give a constant difference of 
potential between the brushes. 

The ordinary methods of regulating are either (𝑎) to alter the 
pressure at which steam is admitted by opening ot closing more or 
less a throttle-valve between the boiler and the engine, or (𝑏) to 
alter the volume of steam admitted to the cylinder by varying the 
point of cut-off. The former plan, was introduced by Watt and is 
still common, especially in small engines. The second plan of 
regulating is generally preferred, especially when the engine is subject
to large variations of load. Within certain limits regulation 
by either plan can be effected by hand, but for the finer adjustment 
of speed some form of automatic governor is necessary. Speed 
governors are commonly of the centrifugal type: a pair of masses 
revolving about a spindle which is driven by the engine are kept 
from flying out by a certain controlling 
force. When an increase of speed occurs 
this controlling force is no longer able to 
keep the masses revolving in their former 
path; they move out until the controlling
force is sufficiently increased, and 
in moving out they act on the regulator 
of the engine, which may be a throttle-valve
or some form of automatic expansion
gear. In the conical pendulum 
governor of Watt (fig. 42) the revolving 
masses are balls attached to a vertical 
spindle by links, and the controlling force 
is furnished by the weight of the balls, 
which, in receding from the spindle, are 
obliged to rise. When the speed exceeds 
or falls short of its normal value they move out or in, and so raise 
or lower a collar 𝑐 which is in connexion by a lever with the 
throttle-valve. 
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 42.png|width=140}}</td><td></td><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 43.png|width=160}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 42.—Watt’s Governor.</td><td></td><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 43.—Loaded Governor.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
77. «I»Loaded Governor«/I».—In a modified form, known as the loaded 
governor, a supplementary controlling force 
is given by placing a weight on the sliding 
collar (fig. 43). This is equivalent to increasing
the weight of the balls without 
altering their mass. In other governors the 
controlling force is wholly or partly produced 
by springs. The use of springs to provide 
controlling force allows the axis of rotation 
to be horizontal, and governors of this class 
are frequently attached directly to the horizontal
shaft in high-speed engines. 

78. «I»Equilibrium of Governor«/I».—In whatever 
way the revolving masses are controlled, the 
controlling force may be treated as a force F 
acting on each ball in the direction of the 
radius towards the axis of revolution. Then, 
if M be the mass of the ball, 𝑛 the number of revolutions per second and 𝑟 the radius of the ball’s path, the governor will revolve in 
equilibrium when F=4π²𝑛²𝑟M (in absolute units), or 

«CTR»𝑛=1/2π«XXL»√«/XXL»F/M𝑟.«/CTR»

In order that the configuration of the governor should be stable, F must increase more rapidly than 𝑟, as the balls move outwards. 
It is obvious that no stable governor maintains a strictly constant speed in the engine which it controls. If the boiler pressure or the demand for work is changed, a certain amount of permanent displacement of the balls is necessary to alter the steam-supply, and the balls can retain their displaced position only by virtue of a permanent change in the speed. The maximum range of speed depends on that amount of change of 𝑛 which suffices to alter the configurationPAGE:858of the governor from the position which gives no steam-supply to 
the position which gives full steam-supply, and the governor is said to be sensitive if this range is a small fraction of 𝑛. 

To find the configuration which the governor will assume at any 
particular speed, or the speed corresponding to a particular configuration, it is only necessary to determine the whole 
controlling force F per ball acting along the radius towards the axis for various values of 𝑟. Let a curve 𝑎𝑏 (fig. 44) be drawn«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:100px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 44.png|width=100}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 44.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE» showing the relation of F to 𝑟. At any assigned value of 𝑟 set up an ordinate QC = 4π²𝑛²𝑟M. Join OC. The point 𝑐, in which OC cuts the curve, determines the value of 𝑟 at which the balls will revolve at the assigned speed 𝑛. Or, if that is given, and the value of 𝑛
is to be found, the line O𝑐 produced will determine 
C, and then 𝑛² = 4π²𝑛²𝑟M. The sensibility of the governor is 
determined by taking points 𝑎 and 𝑏 corresponding to full steam 
and no steam respectively, and drawing lines through them to 
determine the corresponding values of QA and QB. When the 
frictional resistance 𝑓 is known, an additional pair of curves 
drawn above and below ab, with ordinates F + 𝑓 and F − 𝑓 respectively,
serve to show the additional variations in speed which are 
caused by friction. The governor is stable throughout its whole range when the curve 𝑎𝑏 has a steeper gradient than any line drawn from O to meet it. 

79. «I»Isochronism«/I».—If, when the balls are displaced, the controlling force F changes proportionally to the radius 𝑟, the speed is constant. In other words, the equilibrium of the governor is then neutral; it can revolve in equilibrium at one, and only at one, speed. At this speed it assumes, indifferently, any one of its possible configurations. 
The slightest variation of speed drives it to the extremity of its 
range; hence its sensibility is indefinitely great. Such a governor is called «I»isochronous«/I». Where springs furnish the controlling force, an approach to isochronism can be secured by adjusting the initial tension of the springs, and this forms a convenient means of regulating the sensibility. 

But in practice no governor can be absolutely isochronous. It is 
indispensable to leave a small margin of stability for the sake of 
preventing violent change in the supply of steam, especially when 
there is much frictional resistance to be overcome by the governor, or where the influence of the governor takes much time to be felt by the engine. An over-sensitive governor is liable to fall into a state of oscillation called «I»hunting«/I». When an alteration of speed begins to be felt, however readily the governor alters its form, the engine’s response is more or less delayed. If the governor acts by 
closing a throttle-valve, the engine has still a capacious valve-chest 
on which to draw for steam. If it acts by changing the cut-off, its
opportunity is passed if the cut-off has already occurred, and the 
control only begins with the next stroke. 

When the demand for power suddenly falls, the speed rises so 
much as to force the governor into a position of over-control, such that the supply of steam is no longer adequate to meet even the reduced demand for power. Then the speed slackens, and the same kind of excessive regulation is repeated in the opposite direction. A state of forced oscillation is consequently set up. The effect is aggravated by the momentum which the governor balls acquire in being displaced. Hunting is to be avoided by giving the governor a fair degree of stability, by reducing as far as possible the static frictional resistances, and by introducing a «I»viscous«/I» resistance to the displacement of the governor, which prevents the displacement from occurring too suddenly, without affecting the ultimate position of equilibrium. For this purpose many governors are furnished with a «I»dash«/I»-«I»pot«/I», which is a hydraulic or pneumatic brake, consisting of a piston connected to the governor, working loosely in a cylinder which is filled with oil or with air. 

80. «I»Regulation by the Governor of the Steam-Supply: Throttle«/I»-«I»Valve«/I».—The
throttle-valve, as introduced by Watt, was originally a disk turning on a transverse axis across the centre of the steam-pipe. It is now usually a double-beat valve or a piston-valve. When regulation is effected by varying the cut-off, and an expansion-valve of the slide-valve type is used, the governor generally acts by changing the travel of the valve. In other forms of automatic expansion-gear the lap of the valve is altered; in others the governor acts by shifting the expansion-valve eccentric round on its shaft, and so changing its angular advance. 

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 45.png|width=650}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 45.—Corliss Engine, with Spencer Inglis Trip-Gear.«/CTR» 

81. «I»Trip-Gear«/I».—In large stationary engines the most usual plan 
of automatically regulating the expansion is to employ some form of 
trip-gear, the earliest type of which was introduced in 1849 by G. H. 
Corliss (1817–1888), of Providence, U.S.A. In the Corliss system the 
valves which admit steam are distinct from the exhaust-valves. The 
latter are opened and closed by a reciprocating piece which takes its 
motion from an eccentric. The former are opened by a reciprocating 
piece, but are closed by springing back when released by a trip- or 
trigger-action. The trip occurs earlier or later in the piston’s stroke 
according to the position of the governor. The admission-valve 
is opened by the reciprocating piece with equal rapidity whether the 
cut-off is going to be early or late. It remains wide open during the 
admission, and then, when the trip-action comes into play, it closes 
suddenly. The indicator diagram of a Corliss engine consequently 
has a nearly horizontal admission-line and a sharply defined cut-off. 
Generally the valves of Corliss engines are cylindrical plates turning 
in hollow cylindrical seats which extend across the width of the 
cylinder. Often, however, the admission-valves in trip-gear engines 
are of the disk or double-beat type, and spring into their seats whenPAGE:859the trip-gear acts. Messrs Sulzer have developed, this type with 
much success. Many forms of trip-gear have been invented by 
Corliss himself and by others. One of these, the Spencer Inglis 
trip-gear, by Messrs Hick, Hargreaves & Co., is shown in figs. 45 and 
46. A wrist-plate A, which turns on a pin on the outside of the 
cylinder, receives a motion of oscillation from an eccentric. It 
opens the cylindrical rocking-valve B by pulling the link C, which 
consists of two parts, connected to each other by a pair of spring 
clips 𝑎, 𝑎. Between the clips there is a rocking-cam 𝑏, and as the 
link is pulled down this cam places itself more and more athwart 
the link, until at a certain point it forces the clips open. Then the 
upper part of the link springs back and allows the valve B to close by 
the action of a spring in the dash-pot D. When the wrist-plate 
makes its return stroke the clips re-engage the upper portion of the 
link C, and things are ready for the next stroke. The rocking-cam 𝑏 
has its position controlled by the governor through the link E in 
such a way that when the speed of the engine increases it stands 
more athwart the link C, and therefore causes the clips to be released 
at an earlier point in the stroke. A precisely similar arrangement 
governs the admission of steam to the other end of the cylinder. 
The exhaust-valves are situated at the bottom of the cylinder, and 
receive an oscillating motion from a separate wrist-plate, behind A.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 46.png|width=370}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 46.—Corliss Valve-Gear, Spencer Inglis form.«/CTR»

82. «I»Use of Flywheel«/I».—Besides those variations of speed which 
occur from stroke to stroke, which it is the business of the governor 
to check, there are variations within each single stroke due to the 
varying rate at which work is done on the crank-shaft during its 
revolution. To limit these is the function of the flywheel, which 
acts by forming a reservoir of energy to be drawn upon during those 
parts of the revolution in which the work done on the shaft is less 
than the work done by the shaft, and to take up the surplus in those 
parts of the revolution in which the work done on the shaft is greater 
than the work done by it. This alternate storing and restoring of
energy is accomplished by slight fluctuations of speed, whose range
depends on the ratio which the alternate excess and defect of energy
bears to the whole stock the flywheel holds in virtue of its motion.
The effect of the flywheel may be studied by drawing a diagram
of crank-effort, which shows the work done on the crank in the same
way that the indicator diagram shows the work done on the piston.
The same diagram serves another useful purpose in determining the
twisting and bending stress in the crank. 

The diagram of crank-effort is drawn by representing, in rectangular
co-ordinates, the relation between the moment which the connecting-rod
exerts to turn the crank and the angle turned through by
the crank. The moment exerted to turn the crank is readily found
when the direction and magnitude of the thrust exerted by the 
connecting-rod on the crank-pin is known for successive points in 
the revolution. 

83. «I»Influence of the Inertia of the Reciprocating Masses«/I».—This 
thrust depends not only, on the resultant pressure of the steam on the 
piston but also on the inertia of the reciprocating masses. The mass 
of the piston, piston-rod, cross-head, and to some extent that of the 
connecting-rod also, has to be started and stopped in each half 
revolution, and in high-speed engines the forces concerned in this 
action are so large as to affect most materially not only the distribution
of crank-effort but also the stresses which the various parts 
have to be proportioned to bear. The calculation of the stresses 
due to inertia in high-speed engines consequently forms an essential 
part of engine design. Taking M to represent the whole reciprocating
mass, and 𝑎 its acceleration at any instant in the direction of 
the piston’s motion, the force required to produce this acceleration 
is M𝑎/𝑔, and this quantity has to be deducted from the resultant 
pressure of the steam in finding the effective thrust. The effect 
is to reduce the effective thrust at the beginning of the stroke and 
to increase it at the end. The greatest acceleration 𝑎 occurs in the 
extreme position of the piston, most distant from the crank-shaft 
centre, and its value there is 4π²𝑛²𝑟(1 + 𝑟/𝑙) where 𝑟 is the radius 
of the crank, 𝑙 the length of the connecting-rod and 𝑛 the number 
of turns per second. When the piston is in the other extreme 
position, nearest to the shaft, the value of 𝑎 is 4π²𝑛²𝑟(1 − 𝑟/𝑙). The 
exact calculation of inertia effects for the connecting-rod is complicated,
but its influence on the thrust is approximately found by 
treating the mass of the rod as divided into two parts, one of which 
moves with the cross-head and is therefore an addition to the reciprocating
system, while the other moves with the crank-pin and is 
therefore an addition to the revolving system. The mass may be 
divided for this purpose into parts which are inversely proportional 
to the distances of the centre of 
gravity from the cross-head and 
crank-pin respectively. By combining
diagrams of the steam 
thrust and of the forces due to 
inertia a diagram is obtained 
showing the true thrust throughout
the stroke. Fig. 47 gives an«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:185px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 47.png|width=185}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC» 47.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
example: there the line 𝑎𝑏 is 
drawn to show the inertia forces 
for an engine in which the connecting-rod
has 3½ times the 
length of the crank. The straight
line 𝑐𝑑 shows what the inertia
force would be if the connecting-rod were treated as being so long 
that the deviation from simple-harmonic motion might be neglected. 

The inertia of the reciprocating parts imposes a limit on the lightness
of engines of the piston and cylinder type. The proportion 
of weight to power is reduced by increasing mean piston speeds, 
but this process cannot be carried beyond a point at which the forces 
due to inertia become so great as to produce unsafely high alternating 
stresses in the piston-rods and other parts. In some torpedo-boat 
destroyers, where the reduction of weight has been carried as far 
as is practicable, the mean piston speed approaches 1200 ft. per 
minute with nearly 400 revolutions per minute and an 18-in. stroke. 
These engines develop 6000 h.p., and the weight of engines and 
boiler together is only 50 lb per indicated h.p. Such a figure is, 
however, to be regarded as exceptional; weights of 150 to 200 lb 
per h.p. are more usual even in conditions like those of high-speed 
cruisers where saving of weight is specially desirable. 

84. «I»Balancing«/I».—Another aspect in which the inertia of the 
reciprocating parts is important is in regard to the balancing of the 
engine as a whole. Any forces required to accelerate the piston 
and its attached parts produce reaction on the frame and bed-plate 
of the engine, which will set up vibrational disturbances in the 
foundations and ground or the supporting structure. The object 
of balancing is to group the masses in such a manner that their 
inertia effects more or less neutralize one another. This is especially 
important in marine engines, where massive foundations are absent 
and where it may happen that the periodic impulses due to want 
of balance find some portion of the hull free to respond synchronously 
with vibrations so violent as to be inconvenient and even dangerous. 
Even in land engines a want of balance causes enough vibration 
to constitute a serious nuisance in the neighbourhood. 

85. In considering the question of balance, the system of eccentrically revolving masses and the system of reciprocating masses have to be considered separately. A reciprocating mass such as a piston cannot be balanced by the use of revolving masses, for the forces which are due to the inertia of the piston necessarily act along the line of its stroke, while those due to revolving masses are continually changing their direction. The inertia of each connecting-rod may be approximately treated by resolving its mass into two constituents, one of which moves with the crank-pin, and is therefore an addition to the revolving system, while the other moves with the cross-head, and is therefore an addition to the reciprocating system. The mass of the rod may be divided for this purpose into parts which are inversely proportional to the distances of its centre of gravity from the crank-pin and the cross-head respectively. Let M₁, M₂, M₃, &c., represent the various revolving masses 𝑟₁, 𝑟₁, 𝑟₁, &c, their effective radii of rotation, and 𝑎₁, 𝑎₂, 𝑎₃, &c, their distances from any assumed plane of reference taken perpendicular to the shaft. Then the conditions necessary for balance amongst them are that the vector sum of M 𝑎 𝑟 shall vanish, and also that the vector sum of M 𝑟 shall vanish, this latter quantity being the resultant of the moments of the centrifugal forces with respect to the plane of reference. In a four-crank engine there is no serious difficulty in arranging the revolving masses in such a manner that these conditions shall be satisfied, so far as those masses are concerned. The problem, as Professor W. E. Dalby has shown, lends itself readily to graphical treatment (see his treatise on «I»Balancing of Engines«/I»). With respect to the reciprocating masses, a first approximation towards balance is attained by satisfying the conditions which would secure balance if the motions were simply harmonic. These conditions are identical with those which have just been stated for the revolving masses, when 𝑟 is interpreted as the semi-amplitude of the harmonic motion. When the conditions in question are satisfied, the only remaining source of disturbance is that which comes from the fact that the reciprocating masses are connected to the cranks by rods of finite length; in other words, that the motions are not simply harmonic. For this reason the force required to accelerate each piston is greater when the piston is at the end of the stroke farthest from the shaft than when it is at the other end, and consequently the balance, which would be perfect if the connecting-rods werePAGE:860indefinitely long, is disturbed by the presence of forces which vary periodically with a frequency twice that of the rotation. When three cranks, 120° apart, are employed, it will be found that the effect of the shortness of the connecting-rods in causing forces to act in the line of the stroke is reduced to a couple tending to tilt the engine in a fore and aft direction, which may in its turn be balanced by using a second set of three cranks on the same shaft, the second set being so arranged that the couple to which it gives rise neutralizes the couple due to the first set. A six-crank engine may be arranged in this way to secure an extremely close approximation to perfect balance, and the same state of balance can be secured when the number of cranks is reduced to five.

86. The most usual arrangement adopted in marine engines, when
questions of balance are taken into account, is to have four cranks, and consequently four sets of reciprocating masses. In the “Yarrow-Schlick-Tweedy” system of balancing engines four cranks are employed, and by adjusting the relative weights of the four pistons, as well as their distances apart, and by selecting suitable angles for the relative positions of the cranks (differing somewhat from 90°), a close approximation to complete balance is obtained. In triple expansion this arrangement is readily applied when two low-pressure cylinders are used instead of one, the steam from the intermediate cylinder being divided between them, and it is also of course applicable to quadruple expansion engines.

87. In this connexion mention may be made of a type of engine
which has been used in various electric power stations, especially
in America, in which a revolving mass might be employed to balance
completely the inertia effects of two pistons. This is a compound
engine in which the cylinders stand at right angles to one another, one being horizontal and the other vertical. If the piston masses were made equal it is clear that the inertia effect of a revolving mass could be resolved into two components which would balance both. It does not appear, however, that advantage has been taken of this property in the design of actual engines of this type. In the London County Council power station at Greenwich, where the engines are of this class, the unbalanced effects of inertia are so considerable as to affect the instruments at the Observatory half a mile away. One of the conspicuous merits of the steam turbine is that it avoids the use of reciprocating parts and so escapes the inconveniences and limitations to which the inertia of reciprocating parts gives rise.

88. «I»Types of Engine«/I».—In classifying engines with regard to
their general arrangement of parts and mode of working, account
has to be taken of a considerable number of independent characteristics.
We have first a general division into «I»condensing«/I» and
«I»non«/I»-«I»condensing«/I» engines, with a subdivision of the condensing
class into those which act by surface condensation and those
which use injection. Next there is the division into «I»compound«/I»
and «I»non«/I»-«I»compound«/I», with a further classification of the former
as double-, triple- or quadruple-expansion engines. Again,
engines may be classed as «I»single«/I» or «I»double-acting«/I», according as
the steam acts on one or alternately on both sides of the piston.
Again, a few engines—such as steam hammers and certain kinds
of steam pumps—are «I»non-rotative«/I», that is to say, the reciprocating motion of the piston does work simply on a reciprocating piece; but generally an engine does work on a continuously revolving shaft, and is termed «I»rotative«/I». In most cases the crank-pin of the revolving shaft is connected directly with the piston-rod by a connecting-rod, and the engine is then said to be «I»direct«/I»-«I»acting«/I»; in other cases, of which the ordinary beam engine is the most important example, a lever is interposed between the piston and the connecting-rod. The same distinction applies to non-rotative pumping engines, in some of which the piston acts directly on the pump-rod, while in others it acts through a beam. The position of the cylinder is another element of classification, giving «I»horizontal«/I», «I»vertical«/I» and «I»inclined cylinder«/I» engines. Many vertical engines are further distinguished as belonging to the «I»inverted cylinder«/I» class; that is to say, the cylinder is above the connecting-rod and crank. In «I»oscillating cylinder«/I» engines the connecting-rod is dispensed with; the piston-rod works on the crank-pin, and the cylinder oscillates on trunnions to allow the piston-rod to follow the crank-pin round its circular path. In trunk engines the piston rod is dispensed with; the connecting-rod extends as far as the piston, to which it is jointed, and a trunk or tubular extension of the piston, through the cylinder cover, gives room for the rod to oscillate. In «I»rotary«/I» engines there is no piston in the ordinary sense; the steam does work on a revolving piece, and the necessity is thus avoided of afterwards converting reciprocating into rotary, motion. «I»Steam turbines«/I» may, in one sense, be regarded as an extreme development of the rotary type; but they are distinct from all other steam engines in this that their action depends on the
kinetic energy of the steam.

89. Beam Engines.—In the single-acting atmospheric engine
of Newcomen the beam was a necessary feature; the use of water-packing
for the piston required that the piston should move
down in the working stroke, and a beam was needed to let the
counterpoise pull the piston up. Watt’s improvements made
the beam no longer necessary; and in one of the forms he
designed it was discarded—namely, in the form of pumping
engine known as the Bull engine, in which a vertical inverted
cylinder stands over and acts directly on the pump-rod. But the
beam type was generally retained by Watt, and for many years it
remained a favourite with builders of engines of the larger class.
The beam formed a convenient driver for pump-rods and valve-rods;
and the «LN:Parallel Motion|parallel motion«/LN» («I»q.v.«/I») invented by Watt as a means
of guiding the piston-rod, which could easily be applied to a
beam engine, was, in the early days of engine-building, an easier
thing to construct than the plane surfaces which are the natural
guides of the piston-rod in a direct-acting engine. In modern
practice the direct-acting type has to a very great extent displaced
the beam type. For mill-driving and the general purposes
of a rotative engine the beam type is now rarely chosen. In
pumping engines it is somewhat more common, but even there
the direct-acting forms are generally preferred.

90. «I»Direct«/I»-«I»Acting Engines«/I».—Of direct-acting engines the horizontal
type has in general the advantage of greater accessibility,
but the vertical economizes floor space. In small forms the
engine is generally self-contained, that is to say, a single frame
or bedplate carries all the parts including the main bearings
in which the crank-shaft with its flywheel turns. The frame
often takes what is called a girder shape, which brings a portion
of it into a favourable position for taking the thrust between
the cylinder and the crank-shaft bearings and allows two surfaces
to be formed on the frame to serve as guides for the cross-head.
When a condenser is used with a horizontal engine it is usually
placed behind the cylinder, and the air-pump, which is within
the condenser, has a horizontal plunger or piston on a “tail-rod”
or continuation of the main piston-rod through the back
cover of the cylinder. In large horizontal engines the condenser
generally stands in a well below, and its pump, which is vertical,
is driven by means of a bell-crank lever attached by a link to
the engine cross-head.

91. «I»Coupled Engines«/I».—When uniformity of driving effort
or the absence of dead points is important, two independent
cylinders often work on the same shaft by cranks at right angles
to each other. Such engines, which are called “coupled,” can
start readily from any position; the ordinary locomotive engine
is an example. Winding engines for mines and collieries,
in which ease of starting, stopping and reversing is essential,
are very generally made by coupling a pair of cylinders on
opposite sides of the winding drum with link motions as the
means of operating the valves.

92. «I»Compound Engines«/I», «I»Coupled or Tandem«/I».—Large direct-acting
engines are usually compounded either by having a
high- and a low-pressure cylinder side by side, with cranks at
right angles, or by putting one cylinder behind the other with
the axes of both in the same line. The latter is called the
tandem arrangement. In a tandem engine, since the pistons
agree in phase, the steam may expand directly from the small
into the large cylinder. But the connecting-pipe and steam
chest form a receiver of considerable size, and to avoid loss by
“drop” the supply of steam to the large cylinder is cut off
long before the end of the stroke. For mill engines the compound
tandem and compound coupled types of engine are the
most usual. The high-pressure cylinder is very generally fitted
with Corliss or other trip-gear.

93. «I»Jet and Surface Condensation«/I».—In land engines using
condensation the jet form of condenser is common, but surface
condensation is resorted to when the available water-supply is
unsuited for boiler feed. When there is no large supply of
condensing water a very fair vacuum can be obtained by usingPAGE:861an «I»evaporative condenser«/I», consisting of a stack of pipes into which the exhaust steam is admitted and over which a small amount 
of cooling water is allowed to drip. This water is evaporated 
by the heat which is extracted in condensing the steam within. 
Such a condenser is placed in the open, generally on a roof 
where the air has free access. The amount of water it uses need 
not exceed the amount of steam that is condensed, and is therefore
a very small fraction of the amount required in a jet or 
surface condenser. 

94. «I»High«/I»-«I»Speed Direct«/I»-«I»Acting Engines«/I».—Prior to the advent 
of the steam turbine the demand for engines suitable for driving 
electric generators without the intervention of a belt led to the 
introduction of various forms of direct-acting engine adapted 
to run at a high speed. Some of these were «I»single acting«/I», steam 
being admitted to one side of the piston only, generally the back, 
with the result that the rods could be kept in a state of thrust 
throughout the revolution, and alternations of stress in them 
and at the joints thereby avoided, together with the knocking 
and wear of the bearing brasses which it is apt to cause. To 
secure, however, that the connecting-rod should always push 
and never pull against the crank-pin there had to be much 
cushioning during the out stroke on account of the fact that 
from about the middle of that stroke to the end the reciprocating
mass was being retarded. In engines designed by P. W. 
Willans, which were highly successful examples of this class, 
the cushioning was provided by means of a supplementary 
piston which compressed air during the out stroke; the energy 
which the reciprocating masses had to part with in losing their 
motion during the second half of the out stroke was stored in 
this air and was restored in the succeeding down stroke. 

Willans obtained compound or triple expansion by mounting 
two or three cylinders in tandem in a vertical line, with the 
air-compressing piston below them in the form of a trunk which 
served also as a guide for the cross-head. The piston-rod was 
hollow and within it there was a valve rod carrying piston 
valves for the admission and release of the steam. The valve 
rod was worked by an eccentric on the crank-pin which gave 
it the proper relative motion with respect to the hollow piston 
within which it works. The engine was entirely enclosed in 
a casing the bottom of which formed an oil bath in which the 
cranks splashed to ensure ample lubrication. These engines 
for a time had much vogue and gave good results. Many of 
them are in use in electric light stations and elsewhere, but the 
tendency now is to use turbines for this class of work, and even 
in cases where reciprocating engines are preferred they are now 
more usually of the double-acting type, which has the advantage 
of giving a greater output of power for the same weight. 

95. «I»Double-Acting High«/I»-«I»Speed Engines«/I».—Of double-acting 
high-speed engines an interesting form is that of Messrs Belliss 
and Morcom, the chief distinctive feature of which is the use 
of forced lubrication at the pin joints and shaft bearings. In 
a double-acting engine, where the thrust acts alternately on 
one and the other side of the crank-pins and cross-head pins, 
high frequency of stroke tends to produce much knocking and 
wear unless the brasses are very closely adjusted, and in that 
case the pins are liable to get hot, and to “seize” by expanding 
sufficiently to fill the small clearance. This difficulty, which 
exists when lubrication is carried out in the ordinary way, 
is overcome in the Belliss engine by feeding the bearings with 
a continuous supply of oil, which is pumped in under a pressure 
of about 15 lb per sq. in. The presence of a film of oil 
is thereby continuously secured, and knocking is prevented 
although the brasses are not set very close. Notable examples 
in which double action is combined with a relatively high 
frequency of stroke are found in naval engineering practice, 
especially in the engines of high-speed cruisers and torpedo-boat
destroyers. As a rule these engines employ triple expansion 
with four cranks and four cylinders, the third stage of the expansion
being performed in two cylinders, which divide the steam 
between them. But in this field also the steam turbine is 
rapidly displacing the reciprocating type. 

96. «I»Pumping Engines«/I».—In engines for pumping or for blowing air it is not essential to drive a revolving shaft, and in many forms the reciprocating motion of the steam piston is applied directly or through a beam to produce the reciprocating motion of the pump-piston or plunger. On the other hand, pumping engines are frequently made rotative for the sake of adding a flywheel. 

Fig. 48 shows a compound inverted vertical pumping engine 
of the non-rotative class by Messrs Hathorn, Davey & Co. 
Steam is distributed through lift valves, and the distribution 
of steam is controlled by means of a cataract, which makes the 
pistons pause at the end of each stroke. The pistons are in 
line with two pump-rods, and are coupled by an inverted beam 
which gives guidance to the cross-heads by means of an approximate
straight-line motion. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 48.png|width=360}}

«BR»
«FS[92%]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 48.—Vertical Non-Rotative Pumping Engine.«/FS»«/CTR»

Engines of this kind, like the old 
Cornish pump, are able to work expansively against a uniform 
resistance without a flywheel in consequence of the great 
inertia of the reciprocating pieces which include long massive 
pump-rods. Notwithstanding the low frequency of the strokes, 
enough energy is stored in the moving rods to counterbalance 
the inequalities of steam thrust, and the rate of acceleration of 
the system adjusts itself to give, at the plunger end, the nearly 
uniform effort which the pump requires. In other words, the 
motion, instead of being almost simple harmonic as it is in 
rotative engines, is such that the form of the inertia curve when 
drawn as in fig. 47 is nearly the same as that of the steam curve, 
with the result that the distance between the two, which represents
the net effort on the pump-plunger, is nearly constant.
The massive pump-rods act in such a way as to form a 
reciprocating equivalent of a flywheel. 

97. It is, however, only to deep well pumping that this 
applies, and a very numerous class of direct-acting steam pumps 
have too little mass in their reciprocating parts to allow such 
an adjustment to take place. A familiar example is the small 
donkey pump used for feeding boilers, in which the steam-piston
and pump-plunger are on one and the same rod. In 
some of these pumps a rotative element is introduced, partly 
to secure steadiness of working and partly for convenience in 
working the valves. But many pumps of this class are entirely 
non-rotative, and in such cases the steam is generally admitted 
throughout the stroke without expansion. In some of them 
the valve is worked by tappets from the piston-rod. In the 
Blake steam pump a tappet worked by the piston as it reaches 
each end of its stroke throws over an auxiliary steam-valve, 
which admits steam to one or other side of an auxiliary piston 
carrying the main slide-valve. 

98. «I»Worthington Engines«/I».—In the Worthington pumping 
engine two steam cylinders are placed side by side, each working
its own pump-piston. The piston-rod of each is connected 
by a short link to a swinging bar, which actuates the slide-valve 
of the other steam cylinder. In this way one piston begins 
its stroke when the motion of the other is about to cease, and aPAGE:862smooth and continuous action is secured. These engines have 
been extensively applied, on a large scale, to raise water for the 
supply of towns and to force oil through “pipe-lines” in the 
United States. In the larger sizes they are made compound, 
each high-pressure cylinder having a low-pressure cylinder 
tandem with it on the same rod. To allow of expansive working «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:165px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 49.png|width=165}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 49.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
a device is added which compensates for the inequality of effort
resulting from an early cut-off. A 
cross-head A (fig. 40) fixed to each 
of the piston-rods is connected to 
the piston-rods of a pair of oscillating
cylinders «I»B«/I», «I»B«/I», which contain 
water and communicate with a 
reservoir full of air compressed to 
a pressure of about 300 lb per square 
inch. When the stroke (which 
takes place in the direction of the 
arrow) begins the pistons are at first 
forced in, and work is at first done 
by the main piston-rod, through the compensating cylinders 
«I»B«/I», «I»B«/I», on the compressed air in the reservoir. This continues 
until the cross-head has advanced so that the cylinders stand 
at right angles to the line of stroke. Then for the remainder 
of the stroke the compensating cylinders assist in driving the 
main piston, and the compressed air gives out the energy which 
it stored in the earlier portion. The volume of the air reservoir 
is so much greater than the volume of the cylinders, «I»B«/I», «I»B«/I», that 
the air pressure remains nearly constant throughout the stroke. 
Any leakage from the cylinder or reservoir is made good by a 
small pump which the engine drives. 

99. «I»Pulsometer«/I».—Hall’s “pulsometer” is a peculiar pumping
engine without cylinder or piston, which may be regarded 
as the modern representative of the
engine of Savery. The sectional view,
fig. 50, shows its principal parts. There
are two chambers A, A′, narrowing
towards the top, where the steam-pipe
B enters. A ball-valve C allows steam to «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:130px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 50.png|width=130}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 50. Pulsometer.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
pass into one of the chambers and closes
the other. Steam entering (say) the
right-hand chamber forces water out of it
past the clack-valve V into a delivery
passage D, which is connected with an
air-vessel. When the water level in A
sinks so far that steam begins to blow
through the delivery passage, the water
and steam are disturbed and so brought
into intimate contact, the steam in A
is condensed, and a partial vacuum is 
formed. This causes the ball-valve C to
rock over and close the top of A, while water rises from the
suction-pipe E to fill that chamber. At the same time
steam begins to enter the other chamber A′, discharging
water from it, and the same series of actions is repeated in
either chamber alternately. While the water is being driven
out there is comparatively little condensation of steam, partly
because the shape of the vessel does not promote the formation
of eddies, and partly because there is a cushion of air between
the steam and the water. Near the top of each chamber is a
small air-valve opening inwards, which allows a little air to enter
each time a vacuum is formed. When any steam is condensed,
the air mixed with it remains on the cold surface and forms a
non-conducting layer. The pulsometer is, of course, far from
efficient as a thermodynamic engine, but its suitability for
situations where other steam-pumps cannot be used, and the
extreme simplicity of its working parts, make it valuable in
certain cases.

100. «I»Rotary Engines«/I».—From the earliest days of the rotative
engine attempts have been made to avoid the intermittent
reciprocating motion which an ordinary piston engine first
produces and then converts into motion of rotation. Murdoch,
the contemporary of Watt, proposed an engine consisting of a
pair of spur-wheels gearing with one another in a chamber
through which steam passed by being carried round the outer
sides of the wheels in the spaces between successive teeth. 

In Dudgeon’s wheel engine the steam was admitted by ports 
in side-plates into the clearance space behind teeth in gear 
with one another, just after they had passed the line of centres. 
From that point to the end of the arc of contact the clearance 
space increased in volume; and it was therefore possible, by 
stopping the admission of steam at an intermediate point, to 
work expansively. The difficulty of maintaining steam-tight 
connexion between the teeth and the side-plates on which the 
faces of the wheels slide is obvious; and the same difficulty has 
prevented the success of many other forms of rotary engine. 
These have been devised in immense variety, in many cases, it 
would seem, with the idea that a distinct mechanical advantage 
was to be secured by avoiding the reciprocating motion of a 
piston. In point of fact, however, very few forms entirely 
escape having pieces with reciprocating motion. In all rotary 
engines, with the exception of steam turbines—where work is 
done not by pressure but by the kinetic impulse of steam—there
are steam chambers which alternately expand and contract
in volume, and this action usually takes place through a 
more or less veiled reciprocation of working parts. So long as 
engines work at a moderate speed there is little advantage in 
avoiding reciprocation; the alternate starting and stopping of 
piston and piston-rod does not affect materially the frictional 
efficiency, throws no deleterious strain on the joints, and need 
not disturb the equilibrium of the machine as a whole. The 
case is different when very high speeds are concerned; it is then 
desirable as far as possible to limit the amount of reciprocating 
motion and to reduce the masses that partake in it. 

101. «I»Types of Marine Engines«/I».—The early steamers were 
fitted with paddle-wheels, and the engines used to drive them 
were for the most part modified beam engines. Bell’s “Comet”
was driven by a species of inverted beam engine, and another
form of inverted beam, known as the «I»side-lever«/I» engine, was for
long a favourite with marine engineers. In the side-lever
engine the cylinder was vertical, and the piston-rod projected
through the top. From a crosshead on the rod a pair of links,
one on each side of the cylinder, led down to the ends of a pair
of horizontal beams or levers below, which oscillated about a
fixed gudgeon at or near the middle of their length. The two
levers were joined at their other ends by a cross-tail, from which a connecting-rod
was taken to the crank above. The side-lever
engine is now obsolete. In American practice, engines
of the beam type, with a braced-beam supported on «B»«LG»A«/LG»«/B» frames
above the deck, are still common in river-steamers and coasters.
An old form of direct-acting paddle-engine was the «I»steeple«/I»
engine, in which the cylinder was set vertically below the crank.
Two piston-rods projected through the top of the cylinder, one 
on each side of the shaft and of the crank. They were united 
by a crosshead sliding in vertical guides, and from this a return-connecting-rod
led to the crank. Modern paddle-wheel engines 
are usually of one of the following types. (1) In «I»oscillating«/I»
«I»cylinder«/I» engines the cylinders are set under the crank-shaft, 
and the piston-rods are directly connected to the cranks. The 
cylinders are supported on trunnions which give them the necessary
freedom of oscillation to follow the movement of the crank. 
Steam is admitted through the trunnions to slide-valves on 
the sides of the cylinders. In some instances the mean position 
of the cylinders is inclined instead of vertical; and oscillating 
engines have been arranged with one cylinder before and another 
behind the shaft, both pistons working on one crank. The
oscillating cylinder type is best adapted for what would now
be considered comparatively low pressures of steam. (2) «I»Diagonal«/I»
engines are direct-acting engines of the ordinary
connecting-rod type, with the cylinders fixed on an inclined
bed and the guides sloping up towards the shaft. 

When the screw-propeller began to take the place of paddle-wheels in ocean steamers, the increased speed which it required was at first supplied by using spur-wheel gearing in conjunction with one of the forms of engines then usual in paddle steamers.PAGE:863After a time types of engine better suited to the screw were 
introduced, and were driven fast enough to be connected 
directly to the screw-shaft. The smallness of the horizontal 
space on either side of the shaft formed an obstacle to the use 
of horizontal engines,: but this difficulty was overcome in several 
ways. In Penn’s trunk engine, now obsolete, the engine was 
shortened by attaching the connecting-rod directly to the 
piston, and using a hollow piston-rod, called a trunk, large 
enough to allow the connecting-rod to oscillate inside it. The 
return-connecting-rod engine was another horizontal form at 
one time used in the British navy. It was a steeple engine
placed horizontally, with two, and in some cases four, piston-rods
in each cylinder. The piston-rods passed clear of the
shaft and the crank, and were joined beyond it in a guided 
crosshead, from which a connecting-rod returned. 

102. «I»Inverted Vertical Engines«/I».—Both in the navy and in 
merchant ocean steamers one general type of engine is universal, 
where the reciprocating engine has not yet been displaced by 
the steam turbine. This is the inverted vertical direct-acting 
engine, with two or more cylinders placed side by side directly 
over the shaft. Two, three and four cranks are employed, 
the arrangement with four cranks being specially suitable, as 
has already been pointed out, when the balance of the engine 
at high speeds has to be secured. As a rule naval engines are 
triple compound, and those of merchant vessels either triple 
or quadruple. In vessels of high speed and power the engines 
are arranged in twin sets, on two shafts with twin screw 
propellers. 

The marine engine is always furnished with a surface condenser,
consisting of a multitude of brass tubes about ¾ in. in 
diameter cooled by sea-water which is caused to circulate 
through the condenser by means of a circulating pump. This 
pump and also the air pump are often driven independently of 
the main engine. 

103. It is in marine practice that the largest examples of 
engines are to be found. The triple expansion engines of the 
“Campania” and “Lucania,” which develop 30,000 h.p., 
consist of twin sets, on two shafts, each set having three cranks 
and five cylinders, two of 37 in., one of 70 in. and two of 98 in. 
diameter, with a stroke of 69 in. In the “Kaiser Wilhelm 
der Grosse” engines of the same power are arranged in twin 
sets, each set consisting of four cylinders, one of 52 in. diameter, 
one of 89 and two of 96·4, the four giving triple expansion and 
working on four cranks. The “Deutschland” develops 36,000 
h.p. with twin sets, each of which comprises two 36·6-in. 
cylinders, one 73·6-in., one 103·9-in. and two 106·3-in. with a 
stroke of 72·8 in. In the “Kaiser Wilhelm II.” each of the twin 
shafts is driven by two 3-crank 4-cylinder quadruple expansion
engines, the diameters being 37·4, 49·2, 74·8 and 112·2 in. 
and a stroke of 70·9 in. With a working pressure of 225 lb 
per square inch these engines develop in all 40,000 h.p. These 
are examples of the most powerful reciprocating engines used 
in the propulsion of ships, but the successful application of the 
Parsons turbine to marine use has enabled even these powers 
to be greatly surpassed. 

104. «I»Locomotive Engines«/I».—The ordinary locomotive consists
of a pair of direct-acting horizontal or nearly horizontal engines,
fixed in a rigid frame under the front end of the boiler, and
coupled to the same shaft by cranks at right angles, each with a
single slide-valve worked by a link-motion, or by a form of radial
gear. The engine is non-condensing, except in a very few
special cases, and the exhaust steam, delivered at the base of
the funnel through a blast-pipe, serves to produce a draught of
air through the furnace. In some instances a portion of the
exhaust steam, amounting to about one-fifth of the whole, is
diverted to heat the feed-water. In tank engines the feed-water
is carried in tanks on the engine itself; in other engines
it is carried behind in a tender.

On the shaft are a pair of driving-wheels, whose frictional
adhesion to the rails furnishes the necessary tractive force. In
some engines a single pair of driving-wheels are used; in many
more a greater tractive force is secured by having two equal
driving-wheels on each side, connected by a coupling-rod between
pins on the outside of the wheels. In some engines a still
greater proportion of the whole weight is utilized to give
tractive force by coupling three or more wheels on each side. 

It is now general to have under the front of the engine two or 
four smaller wheels which do not form part of the driving system. 
These are carried in a bogie, that is, a small truck upon which the 
front end of the boiler rests by a swivel-pin or plate which allows 
the bogie to turn, so as to adapt itself to curves in the line, and 
thus obviate the grinding of tyres and danger of derailment which 
would be caused by using a long rigid wheel base. The bogie 
appears to have been of English origin;«FN[841f1]:«I»Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng.«/I», liii. 3, p. 50.«/FN» it was brought into 
general use in America, and is now common in English as well 
as in American practice. Instead of a four-wheeled bogie, a 
single pair of leading wheels are also used, carried by a Bissel 
«I»pony«/I» truck, which has a swing-bolster pivoted by a radius bar 
about a point some distance behind the axis of the wheels. This 
has the advantage of combining lateral with radial movement 
of the wheels, both being required if the wheel base is to be 
properly accommodated to the curve. Another method of 
getting lateral and radial freedom is the plan used by F. W. 
Webb of carrying the leading axle in a box curved to the arc 
of a circle, and free to slide laterally for a short distance, under 
the control of springs, in curved guides.«FN[841f2]:«I»Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng.«/I» (1883).«/FN»

In «I»inside«/I»-«I»cylinder«/I» engines the cylinders are placed side by 
side within the frame of the engine, and their connecting-rods 
work on cranks in the driving shaft. In «I»outside«/I»-«I»cylinder«/I» engines 
the cylinders are spread apart far enough to lie outside the frame 
of the engine, and to work on crank-pins on the outsides of the 
driving wheels. This dispenses with the cranked axle, which 
is the weakest part of a locomotive engine. Owing to the 
frequent alternation of strain to which it is subject, a locomotive 
crank axle is peculiarly liable to rupture, and has to be removed 
after a certain amount of use. 

The outside-cylinder type is adopted by several British makers;
in America it is almost universal. «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:134px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 51.png|width=134}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 51.—American Outside-Cylinder Loco­motive.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
There the cylinders are in castings which
are bolted together to form a saddle on
which the bottom of the smoke-box sits.
The slide-valves are on the tops of the
cylinders, and are worked through rocking
levers from an ordinary link-motion.
Fig. 51, which is a half section through
one cylinder of an American locomotive,
by the Baldwin Company of Philadelphia,
shows the position of the cylinders and
valves.

In inside-cylinder engines the slide-valves
are frequently placed back to 
back in a single valve-chest between the 
cylinders. The width of the engine 
within the frame leaves little room for 
them there, and they are reduced to the 
flattest possible form, in some cases with 
split ports, half above and half below a 
partition in a central horizontal plane. In some engines the valves 
are below the cylinders: in many others the valves work on 
horizontal planes above the cylinders; this position is specially 
suitable when some form of radial gear is used instead of the 
link-motion. Radial valve-gears have the advantage, which 
is of considerable moment in inside-cylinder engines, that a 
part of the shaft’s length which would otherwise be needed 
for eccentrics is available to increase the width of main bearings 
and crank-pins, and to strengthen the crank-cheeks. 

The principle of compounding has often been applied to 
locomotive engines, but without much advantage. On this 
subject the reader should refer to the article «LN:Railway|Railways/Locomotive Power«/LN»: 
§ «I»Locomotive Power«/I». A more important modern departure is 
the use of highly superheated steam, which in many locomotives 
has been attended with conspicuous success. PAGE:864105. «I»Steam Turbines«/I».—Steam turbines are distinguished from 
all other types of steam engine by the fact that their action 
involves a double transformation of energy. The heat energy 
present in the steam is first employed to set the steam itself in 
motion, giving it kinetic energy, and this in turn is employed 
to do work on the turbine blades. A brief account of the main 
principles involved will make the action of the various types of 
steam turbine more intelligible. 

106. «I»Theory of the Steam«/I»-«I»jet«/I».—Consider an element of steam, of 
unit mass, acquiring kinetic energy in the expansion of the steam 
through a nozzle or other channel, from a region of pressure 𝑝₁ to 
a region of lower pressure 𝑝₂. Its volume changes from 𝑣₁ to 𝑣₂ in 
the process. The work done upon it by steam from behind is 𝑝₁𝑣₁. 
The work which it does on the steam in front is 𝑝₂𝑣₂. The net 
amount of work done upon it is therefore 𝑝₁𝑣₁−𝑝₂𝑣₂. Its velocity 
changes from V₁ to V₂; the kinetic energy which it gains is therefore 
(V₂²−V₁²)/2𝑔. The internal energy changes from E₁ to E₂. Hence 
by the conservation of energy 

«CTR»(V₂²−V₁²)/2𝑔=J(E₁−E₂)+𝑝₁𝑣₁−𝑝₂𝑣₂«/CTR»

which may be written
«CTR»(V₂²−V₁²)/2𝑔=J(I₁−I₂),«/CTR»

where I is the total heat (§ 31), which is equal to E+𝑝𝑣/J. It is 
assumed here that the action is adiabatic in the sense that no heat 
is received by the steam or given up by it to other bodies as the 
process goes on. 

It is usual to speak of the change of I as the “heat drop” which 
the steam undergoes in acquiring velocity. When the heat drop 
is known the gain in velocity is readily found, as above. In determining
the best drop account must, of course, be taken of the wetness 
of the steam, or of its superheat if it has any. Thus, for superheated 
steam I=I𝑠+κ(𝑡′−𝑡) where I𝑠 is the total heat of saturated steam 
at the same pressure and κ(𝑡′−𝑡) represents the heat taken up in 
the process of superheating to the actual temperature 𝑡′ from the 
temperature of saturation 𝑡. And for wet steam I=I𝑤+𝑞L where 
I𝑤 is the total heat of water, L the latent heat, and 𝑞 is the dryness 
fraction. 

During this process of expansion, which we assume to be adiabatic, 
the steam becomes wet, and the value of 𝑞 accordingly falls. As 
has been shown in § 36, the dryness may be found at any stage in 
adiabatic expansion from the formula—

«CTR»𝑞=τ/L«XXL»(«/XXL»𝑞₁L₁/τ₁+log ετ₁/τ«XXL»)«/XXL»,«/CTR»

or it may be determined by measurement from the entropy-temperature
diagram. A still more convenient diagram in which the heat 
drop can be directly measured is one introduced by Mollier, in which 
the co-ordinates are the entropy and the total heat (see Mollier, 
«I»loc. cit.«/I», or Ewing’s «I»Steam Engine«/I»). 

The pressure-volume diagram gives a very useful alternative 
means of finding the heat drop «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:215px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 52.png|width=215}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 52</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
or energy available for transformation.
Consider steam or 
any other gas supplied at 
pressure 𝑝₁ and expanding to 
pressure 𝑝₂, at which pressure 
it is discharged. The work 
which it does is measured by 
the area ABCD of the pressure-volume
diagram (fig. 52), 
namely, 

«CTR»«MATH:\int_{p_1}^{p_2}vdp«/MATH».«/CTR»

If this work is wholly done upon this steam in giving it velocity, 
the kinetic energy acquired is equal to it, that is 

«CTR»V₂²−V₁²/2𝑔=«MATH:\int_{p_1}^{p_2}vdp«/MATH».«/CTR»

We have already seen (§ 41) that in adiabatic expansion this integral 
measures the heat drop, being equal to I₁−I₂. 

If the mode of expansion is such as to make 𝑝𝑣𝑛=constant, 𝑛 
being any index, then 
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="margin-right:auto;margin-left:auto"><tr><td>«MATH:\int_{p_1}^{p_2}vdp«/MATH»</td><td>=𝑛/𝑛−1«XXL»(«/XXL»𝑝₁𝑣₁ − 𝑝₂𝑣₂«XXL»)«/XXL»</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>=𝑛/𝑛−1«XXL»(«/XXL»1 − D𝑛−¹/𝑛«XXL»)«/XXL»𝑝₁𝑣₁,</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

where D is the ratio in which the pressure falls, namely 𝑝₂/𝑝₁. 

Now the adiabatic expansion of steam, starting from an initially 
dry saturated state, is very approximately represented by the formula 
𝑝𝑣¹·¹³⁵=constant. Hence the area of the pressure-volume diagram, 
which under these conditions measures the work theoretically 
obtainable, is equal to 8·41(1—D⁰·¹¹⁹)𝑝₁𝑣₁, a quantity which will 
be found on evaluation to agree closely with the value of I₁−I₂.

107. «I»Form of the Jet in Adiabatic Expansion«/I».—As expansion proceeds
the volume of the steam, per pound, at any stage is found by
multiplying the volume of 1 lb of saturated steam, at the pressure
then reached, by the dryness fraction 𝑞. On comparing the velocity 
acquired at any intermediate stage of expansion—as calculated 
from the heat drop down to that stage—with the increase in volume, 
it will be found that in the earliest stages the gain in velocity is 
relatively great, but as expansion proceeds the increase in volume 
outstrips the increase in velocity. Hence the proper form for a 
nozzle to give adiabatic expansion is one in which the area of section 
at first contracts and afterwards becomes enlarged. The area of 
section to be provided for the discharge is found by dividing the 
volume 𝑣 at each stage of the velocity V acquired up to that stage, 
and the ratio 𝑣/V at first diminishes and afterwards increases as 
the expansion proceeds. Take, for instance, as a numerical example, 
a case in which dry saturated steam is admitted to a nozzle at an 
absolute pressure of 213 lb per sq. in., and expands adiabatically, 
giving itself velocity, until the, pressure falls to 1·7 per sq. in. It 
will be found on working out numerical values that until the pressure 
falls to about 123 lb per sq. in. the steam is gaining velocity so rapidly 
that though its volume is expanding the stream-lines are convergent. 
Below that pressure, however, the augmentation of volume is relatively
so great that a larger and larger area of section has to be 
provided for the flow. Thus, when the pressure is 123 lb per sq. in. 
the dryness 𝑞 is 0·96, the volume per pound is 3·51 cub. ft., the 
heat drop is 25¼ thermal units, giving a velocity of 1510 ft. per second. 
Consequently, the area of the stream is 0·00233 sq. ft. per pound of 
flow, and this is the minimum value. When the pressure falls 
to 1·7 lb per sq. in. the dryness 𝑞 is 0·784, the volume per pound 
is 157·8 cub. ft., the heat drop is 175·7 thermal units, giving a 
velocity of 3980 ft. per second, and consequently the area of the 
stream is 0·0396 sq. ft. per pound of flow. 

108. «I»De Laval’s Divergent Nozzle«/I».—It is on this basis that De 
Laval’s divergent nozzle is designed. The “throat” or smallest «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:215px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 53.png|width=215}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 53</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
section is approached by a more or less rounded entrance, allowing 
the stream-lines to converge, and from the throat outwards the nozzle 
expands in any gradual manner, generally in fact as a simple cone 
(fig. 53). In the example just 
given the final area of section
would be seventeen times that 
of the throat to provide for 
adiabatic expansion down to 
a pressure of 1·7 lb per sq. in. 
With any final area less than 
this the pressure at exit would 
be higher than 1·7 lb; it would 
in fact adjust itself to give a value of 𝑣/V corresponding to
the area, and the remainder of the pressure drop would be wasted. 
For expansion to atmospheric pressure (14·7 per sq. in.) the area 
at exit would be 3·14 times that of the throat. 

The equation of velocity 

«CTR»V²/2𝑔 =𝑛/𝑛−1 «XXL»(«/XXL»1 − D𝑛−1/𝑛«XXL»)«/XXL»𝑝₁𝑣₁«/CTR»

may be applied to calculate generally the discharge per square foot of 
stream section, and hence to find at what point in the fall of pressure 
this discharge becomes a maximum—in other words, to determine 
the pressure at the throat. Since 𝑝𝑣𝑛=𝑝₁𝑣₁𝑛 

«CTR»𝑣=𝑣₁/D¹/𝑛 where D=𝑝/𝑝₁.«/CTR»

The discharge per square foot when the volume is 𝑣 is

«CTR»Q=V/𝑣=VD¹/𝑛/𝑣₁=«XXL»√ {«/XXL»2𝑔𝑛/𝑛 − 1 · 𝑝₁/𝑣₁ «XXL»(«/XXL» D²/𝑛 − D𝑛⁺¹/𝑛«XXL») } «/XXL».«/CTR»

Q will be a maximum when 𝑑Q/𝑑D is zero, which occurs when 

«CTR»D=«XXL»(«/XXL»2/𝑛 + 1 «XXL»)«/XXL»𝑛/𝑛−¹.«/CTR»

This result is general for any gas. With saturated steam, 𝑛 being 
1·135, Q is a maximum when D=0·577, that is to say, the pressure 
at the throat is 57·7% of the initial pressure, a result which agrees 
with the figures quoted above for a particular case. 

The maximum value of Q, namely the discharge in pounds per 
square foot at the throat, is 

«CTR»3·6√(𝑝₁/𝑣₁),«/CTR»

and the velocity there is 5·85√(𝑝₁𝑣₁). In these expressions 𝑝₁ is the 
initial pressure in pounds per square foot. 

109. From these considerations it follows that, provided the final 
pressure is less than 0·577 times the initial pressure, the total discharge depends simply on the least area of section of the nozzle and on the initial pressure, and is independent of the final pressure. By continuing the expansion in a divergent nozzle, after the throat is passed, the amount of discharge is not increased, but the steam is caused to acquire a greater velocity of exit, namely the velocity corresponding to the augmented pressure range. 

110. When the pressure drop is small (𝑝₂ greater than 0·577 𝑝₁) 
the full velocity due to the drop is obtained without the use of aPAGE:865divergent nozzle. This is the case, for instance, in the Parsons 
turbine, where the whole expansion is divided into many stages each
of which involves only a small drop in pressure. 

111. «I»Influence of Friction«/I».—We have dealt so far with the ideal
case of no friction, and have taken the whole work of expansion as
going to produce kinetic energy in the jet. But under real conditions
there is a progressive dissipation of energy through friction;
as expansion proceeds the steam loses part of its kinetic energy
which is restored to it as heat. Thus, at every stage in the process
the velocity acquired is less than it would be in frictionless adiabatic expansion,
but the steam is drier and its volume is greater in consequence
of the restored heat. Referring to the entropy-temperature diagram«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:150px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 54.png|width=150}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 54.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
(fig. 54) the process of expansion under
conditions involving friction is represented 
not by the adiabatic line 𝑐𝑑 but by some
such line as 𝑐𝑔 lying between the adiabatic
line and the saturation line 𝑐𝑓. The final 
condition of dryness is 𝑎𝑔/𝑎𝑓 instead of
𝑎𝑑/𝑎𝑓. During this expansion the effect
of friction, as regards the entropy, is 
equivalent to the communication to the
substance of a quantity of heat represented
by the area 𝑝𝑐𝑔𝑟. Hence that
area represents the work converted by
friction into heat. The whole work done
during expansion is the area 𝑎𝑏𝑐𝑔, which
is more than before by the area 𝑑𝑐𝑔. The difference, namely 𝑎𝑏𝑐𝑔
«I»minus«/I» 𝑝𝑐𝑔𝑟, represents what may be called the net heat drop when
friction is allowed for: it represents what is effectively available for
giving kinetic energy to the jet. This net area may also be
expressed as equal to 𝑎𝑏𝑐𝑑 «I»minus«/I» 𝑝𝑑𝑔𝑟. Compared with frictionless
adiabatic expansion the net loss resulting from friction is the area
𝑝𝑑𝑔𝑟. The volume is increased in the ratio of 𝑎𝑔 to 𝑎𝑑, and this
has to be taken account of in determining the proper dimensions of
the divergent nozzle. 

112. Turning now to the question of utilizing the kinetic
energy of steam in a steam turbine, it will be clear from the
figures that have been given that if the whole heat drop is allowed
to give kinetic energy to the steam in one operation, as in the
De Laval nozzle, a velocity of about 4000 ft. per second has to
be dealt with. To take advantage of a jet in the most efficient
manner in a turbine consisting of a single wheel the velocity
of the buckets against which the steam impinges should be nearly
one half the velocity of the stream. But a peripheral velocity
approaching 2000 ft. per second is impracticable. Apart from
the difficulties which it would involve as regards gearing down
to such a speed as would serve for the driving of other machines,
which are to employ the power, there are no materials of construction
fitted to withstand the forces caused by rotation at
such a speed.

Hence it is advantageous to divide the process into stages.
This may be done by using more than one wheel to absorb the
kinetic energy of the jet, as is done in the Curtis turbine, or by
dividing the heat drop into many steps, making each of these 
so small that the steam never acquires an inconveniently great 
velocity, as is done in the Parsons turbine. Turbines which 
employ one or other of these two methods, or a combination 
of both, achieve a greater economy of steam than is practicable 
with a single wheel. 

113. «I»De Laval Turbine«/I».—Thanks, however, to the inventions 
of De Laval, the single expansion single wheel type of turbine, 
with buckets in the rim, has been brought to a degree of efficiency
which, while considerably less than is reached in compound
turbines, is still remarkably good. This has been done 
by the use of the divergent nozzle and with the help of mechanical
devices which enable the peripheral speed to be very high,
though even with the help of these devices the speed of the
buckets falls considerably short of that which would be suitable
to the velocity of the jet. In De Laval’s turbine the steam
expands at one step from the full pressure of the supply to the
pressure of the exhaust by discharge in the form of a jet from a
divergent nozzle. It then acts on a ring of buckets or blades
in much the same way as the jet of water acts on the buckets of a
Pelton wheel or other form of pure impulse turbine. To utilize
a fair fraction of the kinetic energy of the jet the blades have to
run at an enormous velocity, and the speed of the shaft which
carries them is so great that gearing down is resorted to before
the motion is applied to useful purposes. The general arrangement
of the steam nozzle and turbine blades is illustrated
in fig. 55. The blades project from the circumference of
a disk-shaped wheel and «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:225px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 55.png|width=225}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 55.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
form a complete ring round
it, only a few of the blades 
being shown in the sketch.
The increasing section of
the nozzle is calculated
with reference to the final
pressure, according to the
principles already explained. The jet impinges at one side 
of the wheel and escapes at the other after having had its 
direction of motion nearly reversed. The expansion in the nozzle 
is carried to atmospheric pressure, or near it, if the turbine 
is to be used without a condenser; but in many cases an ejector 
condenser is employed, and when that is done the nozzle is 
of a form which adapts it to expand the steam to a correspondingly
lower pressure. It is only in the smaller sizes of these 
turbines that a single nozzle is used; in the larger steam turbines, 
as in large Pelton wheels, several nozzles are applied at intervals 
along the circumference of the disk. The peripheral velocity 
of the blades ranges from about 500 ft. per second in the smallest
sizes (5 h.p.) up to nearly 1400 ft. per second in turbines of
300 h.p. In a 50 h.p. De Laval turbine the shaft which carries
the turbine disk makes 16,000 revolutions per minute; in the
5 h.p. size it makes as many as 30,000 revolutions per minute.
A turbine developing 300 h.p. uses a wheel 30 in. in diameter,
running at over 10,000 revolutions per minute, with a peripheral
speed of nearly 1400 ft. per second. These enormous
speeds are made possible by the ingenious device of using a
flexible shaft, which protects the bearings and foundations
from the vibration which any want of balance would otherwise
produce. The elasticity of the shaft is such that its period of
transverse vibration is much longer than the time taken to 
complete a revolution. The high-speed shaft which carries 
the turbine disk is geared, by means of double helical wheels 
with teeth of specially fine pitch, to a second-motion shaft, 
which runs at one-tenth of the speed of the first; and from this 
the motion is taken, by direct coupling or otherwise, to the 
machine which the turbine is to drive. The wheel carrying 
the buckets is much thickened towards the axis to adapt it to 
withstand the high stresses arising from its rotation. Turbines 
of this class in sizes up to 300 or 400 h.p. are now in extensive 
use for driving dynamos, fans and centrifugal pumps. Compared
with the Parsons turbine, De Laval’s lends itself well 
to work where small amounts of power are wanted, and there «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:150px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 56.png|width=150}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 56.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
it achieves a higher efficiency, but in large sizes the Parsons
turbine is much the more efficient of the two. Trials of a De
Laval turbine used with a condenser, and developing about
63 h.p., have shown an average steam consumption at the rate
of about 20 lb per brake-horse-power-hour,
and even better results are 
reported in turbines of a larger size. 

114. «I»Action of the Jet in De Laval’s«/I»
«I»Turbine«/I».—In entering the turbine the jet 
is inclined at an angle a to the plane of 
the wheel. Calling its initial velocity V₁
and the velocity of the buckets 𝑢 we 
have, as in fig. 56, V₂ for the velocity of the 
steam relatively to the wheel on admission.
A line AB parallel to V₂ therefore 
determines the proper angle of the blade 
or bucket on the entrance side if the steam 
is to enter without shock. As the steam 
passes through the blade channel the 
magnitude of this relative velocity does 
not change, except that it is a little 
reduced on account of friction. The 
action is one of pure impulse; there is 
no change of pressure during the passage, 
and consequently no acceleration of the 
steam through drop in pressure after 
once it has left the nozzle. Hence V₃, 
the relative velocity at exit may (neglecting friction) be taken as equal to V₂
The direction of V₃ or BC is tangent to the exit side of the bucket.PAGE:866Compounding V₃ with 𝑢 we find V₄, which is the absolute velocity 
of the steam after exit, and this should be no greater than is required 
to get the steam clear of the wheel. The most favourable condition 
of running would be when the bucket velocity 𝑢 is such that V₄ is 
perpendicular to the plane of the wheel, for V₄ would then have its 
least possible value. Assuming the angle of discharge β′ to be 
equal to β, we should in that event have 𝑢=½V₁cos α, which 
approximates more and more closely to ½V₁ the smaller α is made. 
The ideal efficiency would be (V₁²−V₄²)/V₁² or 1−sin²α in a 
turbine in which the jet enters the buckets Without shock and 
travels over them without friction. In practice α is about 20°. 
Owing to the impossibility of making the bucket speed so high as 
the above condition implies the steam enters the buckets of a De 
Laval turbine with some shock and leaves them with a velocity 
inclined to the plane of the wheel, with a backward component, 
and the turbine loses something in efficiency through this exit 
velocity being greater than the ideal minimum. 

Taking a test of a De Laval turbine of 300 h.p. in which the steam 
consumed was 15·6 lb per horse-power-hour, Stodola estimates that 
the losses in the nozzle amount to about 15% of the available energy 
or total heat drop, the losses in the buckets (due to friction and to 
eddy currents set up by shock) to 21% and the losses due to the 
velocity retained by the steam at exit to nearly 5%. The losses 
due to friction in the mechanism consume about 5% more, leaving 
a net return of about 54% of the available energy. 

115. «I»Curtis Turbine«/I».—The Curtis turbine, like that of De 
Laval, is a pure impulse turbine, but the velocity of the jet is 
extracted not by one ring of buckets but by a series of rings, each 
of which extracts a certain part. Between the first and second 
rings of buckets there are fixed guide blades which serve to 
turn the remaining motion of the steam into a direction proper 
for its action on the second ring, and so on. The jet, having 
acquired its velocity in a nozzle in the first place, often acts on 
three successive rings of moving buckets, with two sets of fixed 
guide blades between, the three co-operating to extract its 
kinetic energy. But the Curtis turbine is generally compound 
in the further sense that the total drop from admission to condenser
pressure is itself divided into two, three or more stages, 
the steam acquiring velocity anew at each stage and then giving 
up that velocity in passing through a series of impulse turbine 
rings generally either two or three in number before undergoing 
the next drop in pressure. 

116. «I»Action of the Steam in the Curtis Turbine«/I».—In this 
division of the heat drop or pressure drop into stages Curtis 
follows Parsons. The distinctive feature in Curtis is the multi-impulse
action which occurs at each pressure stage. This is 
illustrated in the diagram (fig. 57), which shows the nozzle and 
blades of a two-stage Curtis turbine, with three rings of moving 
blades or buckets in each stage, arranged, of course, round the 
periphery of a wheel. 

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 57.png|width=300}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 57.—Diagram of Steam Nozzles and Blades, Curtis Steam 
Turbine.«/CTR»

The velocity acquired in the nozzles is 
extracted as the steam pursues its sinuous course between moving 
and fixed blades, and it leaves the third ring in each case with 
only a small residual velocity, the direction of which is approximately
parallel to the axis of the wheel. The changes of velocity
are illustrated in fig. 58, which, for the sake of simplification,
is drawn for the ideal case of no friction. There 𝑢 is the
velocity of the buckets, V₁ the initial velocity of the jet, and the initial relative velocity on entrance to the first moving ring. V₃ is the absolute velocity on entering the second moving ring, and V₄ the relative velocity. V₅ is the absolute velocity on entering the third moving ring and V₆ the relative velocity. Finally, V₇ is the absolute velocity on leaving the third moving 
ring, and this in the example here drawn is parallel to the axis 
of the turbine. The first moving blades have sides parallel to
OB, BP; the first fixed blades have sides parallel to CP, PD.
The second moving blades have sides parallel to PE, EQ; the
second fixed blades to FQ, QG, and the third moving blades to
QH, HR. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 58.png|width=280}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 58.«/CTR»

The steam then passes on to a second set of divergent nozzles
in which it undergoes a second drop in pressure, acquiring
velocity afresh, which it loses as before in passing through a set
of three rings of moving buckets. In some Curtis turbines
this is followed by a third and often a fourth similar process
before the condenser is reached. In a four-stage Curtis turbine
the speed of the buckets is usually about 400 ft. per second;
the steam issues from each set of nozzles with a velocity of about
2000 ft. per second, and each set of moving rings reduces this
by something like 400 ft. per second. The losses due to steam
friction are somewhat serious, although the blade speed in each
set is sufficient to let the steam enter without shock; on the
other hand, the Curtis turbine escapes to a great extent losses
due to leakage which are present in the Parsons type. The
velocity diagram shown in fig. 58 may readily be modified to
allow for effects of friction. Owing to the progressive reduction
of velocity in passing from ring to ring a larger and larger area
of blade opening is required, and this is provided for by making
the height of the blades increase in the successive rings of each
series. 

117. «I»Performance of Curtis Turbines«/I».—Curtis turbines have 
been successfully applied in large sizes, especially in America, 
to drive electric generators, with outputs of as much as 9000 
kilowatts, and in a few instances they have been adapted to 
marine propulsion. In large sizes, and using moderately superheated
steam, the Curtis turbine has achieved a high degree of 
efficiency. The advantage of superheating, in any type of 
turbine, is to reduce the wetness which the steam develops as 
it expands during work. The prejudicial effect of wetness is 
chiefly that it increases friction, especially in the later stages 
of the expansion. Tests of Curtis turbines show that they 
maintain a very uniform efficiency throughout a wide range 
of loads, and are capable of being much overloaded withoutPAGE:867material increase in the ratio of steam consumption to output. 
In tests of a 9000 kilowatt Curtis turbine using steam of about 
200 lb pressure and 80° C. superheat, with a vacuum of 295 in. 
the consumption of steam is reported to have been only 13 lb 
per kilowatt-hour, and this figure remained almost constant 
for loads ranging from 8000 to 12,000 kilowatts. In a 5000 
kilowatt turbine under very similar conditions the consumption 
is reported to have been 135 lb per kilowatt-hour. In the 
usual arrangement of the Curtis turbine the shaft is vertical 
and the wheels lie in horizontal planes, the weight of the revolving
parts being taken by a footstep bearing with forced 
lubrication, and the electric generator is mounted on the top. 
There are usually in the large sizes four stages of expansion, each 
stage being separated from the one above it by a diaphragm 
plate containing the nozzles in which the next step in velocity 
is acquired. The expansion has been divided into as many as 
seven stages in a Curtis turbine for marine use, the shaft being 
then horizontal, and in all except the first stage in that example 
the pressure drop is so comparatively small as not to require 
divergent nozzles. 

118. «I»Parsons Turbines.«/I»—In the turbines of De Laval and 
Curtis the action on the moving blades or buckets is entirely 
one of impulse. No drop of pressure occurs while the steam is 
passing the moving blades, and its velocity relative to the blade 
surface undergoes no change except such as is brought about by 
friction.
«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:right"><tr><td>{{IMG:djvu_vol25_page0867_aaec15e4.jpg}}</td></tr><tr><td>«CTR»«SC»Fig.«/SC» 59.—Fixed and Moving Blades<br>of Parsons Turbine.«/CTR»</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
In the Parsons turbine, on the other hand, there is a 
«I»reaction«/I» effect. The steam
acquires relative velocity 
and loses pressure as it
passes each ring of moving 
blades: in this respect
the action in the moving
blades is like the action in
the fixed blades. Each 
pair of fixed and moving 
rings makes up what is called a “stage” and may be said to 
constitute a separate turbine: the whole is a series of many 
such stages. In each stage the drop in pressure and in heat 
is divided equally between the fixed and moving element, 
the exit and entrance angles and the form of the blades 
generally being alike in both. The number of stages depends 
on what peripheral speed it is convenient to use. Where 
comparatively high blade speeds are practicable, as in turbines
for driving electric generators, the steam is allowed to 
acquire a fairly high velocity at each ring of blades, and in 
such cases so few as 45 stages may be suitable. In large marine 
turbines, on the other hand, where the number of revolutions 
per minute has to be kept low in the interests of propeller 
efficiency, the blade speeds cannot be kept high without making 
the diameters unduly great, and consequently more stages are 
required: in such turbines the number of stages may be from 
100 to 200. The general relation of fixed to moving blades 
and the characteristic form of both will be seen from fig. 59. 

Fig. 60 shows a complete Parsons turbine of 1000 kilowatts 
capacity in longitudinal section through the casing. The 
fixed blades are caulked with separating distance-pieces into 
grooves turned on the inner surface of the case and project inwards:
the moving blades are similarly secured in grooves which 
are turned on the surface of the rotating drum. Between drum 
and case there is an annular space fitted in this way with 
successive rings of fixed and moving blades. There is considerable
longitudinal clearance from ring to ring, but over the 
tips of the blades the clearance is reduced to the smallest possible
amount consistent with safety against contact (generally 
from 15 to 30 thousandths of an inch in turbines of moderate 
size). Steam enters at A, expands through all the rings of blades 
in turn and escapes to the condenser at B. To provide for the 
increase in its volume the size of the blade passages enlarges 
progressively from the high to the low pressure end. In the example
shown this is done partly by lengthening the blades and 
partly by increasing the circumference of the drum, which has 
the further effect of increasing the blade velocity, so that the 
expanded steam not only has a larger area of passage open to 
it but is also allowed to move faster, and consequently each unit 
of the area is more effective in giving it vent. Instead of
attempting to make the change in passage area continuous from ring to 
ring, as the ideal turbine would require, it is done in a limited 
number of steps and the several rings in each step are kept of 
the same size. Thus in the example shown in the figure the 
first step consists of seven pairs of rings or stages, the next two 
also of seven each, the next three of four each, the next of two 
and so on. This is convenient for constructive reasons and gives a 
sufficiently good approximation to the ideal conditions as regards 
the relation of steam volume to blade-passage-area and velocity. 

«CTR»{{IMG:djvu_vol25_page0867_7607f412.jpg}} 
«SC»Fig«/SC». 60.—Parsons Turbine.«/CTR»PAGE:868119. «I»Balance of longitudinal Forces: Dummies«/I».—Since the pressure of the steam falls progressively from left to right there is a resultant longitudinal thrust on the drum forcing it to the right, which is balanced by means of “dummy” rings C′ C″ C‴. These correspond in diameter with the several portions of the bladed drum and are connected with them by steam passages which secure that each dummy shall have the same pressure forcing it to the left as tends on the corresponding part of the drum to force it to the right. No steam-tight fit is practicable at the dummies, but leakage of the steam past them is minimized by the device of furnishing the circumference of each dummy with a series of rings which revolve between a corresponding series of fixed rings projecting inwards from the case. The dummy rings do not touch but the clearance spaces are made as fine as possible and the whole forms a labyrinth which offers great resistance to the escape of steam. Substantially the same device is employed to guard against leakage in the glands DD where the shaft leaves the turbine case. There is a “thrust block” E at one end of the shaft which maintains the exact longitudinal position of the revolving part and allows the fine clearances between fixed and moving dummy rings to be adjusted. 

120. Lubrication.—The main bearings LL are supplied with 
oil under pressure kept in circulation by a rotary pump F which 
draws the oil from the tank G. The pump shaft H, which also 
carries a spring governor to control the speed of the turbine, 
is driven by a worm on the main shaft. The same oil is circulated
over and over again and very little of it is consumed. 
No oil mixes with the steam, and in this point the turbine has a 
marked advantage over piston and cylinder engines, which is 
especially important in marine use. In small fast-running 
turbines each bearing consists of a bush on which three concentric
sleeves are slipped, fitting loosely over one another with 
a film of oil between. The whole acts as a cushion which damps 
out any vibration due to want of balance or alignment. In 
large turbines this device is dispensed with and a solid brass 
bearing lined with white metal is employed. 

121. «I»Blades«/I».—The blades are generally of drawn brass, but 
copper is used for the first few rows in turbines intended for 
use with superheated steam. In the most usual method of 
construction they are put one by one Into the grooves, along 
with distance pieces which hold them at the proper angle and 
proper distance apart, and the distance pieces are caulked to fix 
them. The length of the blades ranges from a fraction of an inch 
upwards. In the longest blades of the largest marine steam 
turbines it is as much as 22 in. When over an inch or so long 
they are strengthened by a ring of stout wire let into a notch 
near the tip and extending round the whole circumference. 
Each blade is “laced” to this by a fine copper binding wire, 
and the lacing is brazed. For long blades two and even three 
such rings of supporting wire are introduced at various distances
between root and tip. The tips are fined down nearly 
to a knife-edge so that in the event of contact taking place at 
the tips between the “rotor” or revolving part, and the “stator”
or case, they may grind without being stripped off. The
possible causes of such contact are wear of bearings and unequal
expansion in heating up. With a proper circulation of oil the 
former should not take place, and the clearances are made large 
enough to provide for the latter. Various plans have been 
devised to facilitate the placing and fixing of the blades. In 
one method they are slung on a wire which passes through holes 
in the roots and in the distance pieces and are assembled beforehand
in a curved chuck so as to form a sector of the required 
ring, and are brazed together along with the supporting wires 
before the segment is put in place. In another method the 
roots are fixed in a brass rod in which cuts have been machined 
to receive them; in another the rod in which the roots are secured 
has holes of the right shape formed in it to receive the blades
by being cast round a series of steel cores of the same shape as
the blades: the cores are then removed and the blades fixed
in the holes.

122. «I»Drums«/I».—In small turbines the drums carrying the revolving
blades are solid forgings; in large turbines they are
also of forged steel but in the form of hollow cylinders turned
true inside as well as out. These are supported on the shafts 
by means of wheel-shaped steel castings near the ends, over 
which they are shrunk and to which they are fastened by screws 
the heads of which are riveted over. The case is of cast iron with 
a longitudinal joint which allows the upper half to be lifted off. 

123. «I»Governing«/I».—The governor regulates the turbine by causing the steam to be admitted in a series of blasts, the duration of which is automatically adjusted to suit the demand for power. When working at full power the admission is practically continuous; at lower powers the steam valve is opened and closed at rapidly recurring intervals. Each revolution of the governor shaft causes a cam, attached to the governor, to open and close a relay valve which admits steam to a cylinder controlling the position of the main steam valve, which accordingly opens and closes in unison with the relay. The position of the governor 
determines how long the relay will admit steam to the controlling cylinder, and consequently how long the main valve will be held open in each period. In turbines driving electric generators the control of the relay-valve is sometimes made to depend on variations of the electric pressure produced instead of variations in the speed. In either case the arrangement secures 
control in a manner remarkably free from frictional interference, and therefore secures a high degree of uniformity in speed or in electric pressure, as the case may be. 

To admit of overloading, that is, of working at powers considerably
in excess of the full power for which the turbine is 
designed, provision is often made to allow steam to enter at 
the full admission pressure beyond the first set of rows of 
blades: this increases the quantity admitted, and, though the 
action is somewhat less efficient, more power is developed. An 
orifice will be seen in fig. 60 a little to the right of the main 
steam admission orifice, the purpose of which is to allow steam 
to enter direct to the second set of blades, missing the first 
seven stages, so that the turbine may cope with overloads. 

124. «I»Absence of Wear«/I».—Owing to its low steam velocities 
the Parsons turbine enjoys complete immunity from wear of 
the blades by the action of the steam. A jet of steam, especially 
when wet, impinging at very high velocity against a metal 
surface, has considerable cutting effect, but this is absent at 
velocities such as are found in these turbines, and it is found 
that even after prolonged use the blades show no signs of wear 
and the efficiency of the turbine is unimpaired. 

125. «I»Blade Velocity«/I».—Experience has shown that the most 
economical results are obtained when the velocity of the steam 
through the blades is about twice the velocity of the blades themselves,
and the Parsons turbine is accordingly designed with, as far as possible, a constant velocity ratio of about this value. As already explained, it is convenient in practice to divide the expansion into a comparatively small number of steps (about twelve steps is a usual number), giving a constant area of steam passage to the first few rows, a larger area to the next few, and so on. An effect of this is that the velocity ratio varies slightly above and, below the value of two to one, but if the steps are not too great this variation is not sufficient materially to affect the efficiency. 

If the spindle or drum carrying the moving blades were of the 
same diameter throughout, the blades at the exhaust end would 
have to be exceedingly long in order to give passage to the rarefied steam. By increasing the diameter towards the exhaust end the peripheral velocity is increased, and hence the proper velocity for the steam is also increased. The amount of heat drop per ring is consequently greater towards the low-pressure end: in other words, the number of rings for a given drop is reduced. Taking the turbine as a whole, the number of rings will depend on the blade velocity at each step, the relation being such that Σ𝑛V𝑏²=constant for a given total drop from admission to exhaust, 𝑛 being the number of rings whose blade velocity is V𝑏. It appears that a usual value of this constant is about 1,500,000«FN[846f1]:Speakman, “The Determination of the Principal Dimensions 
of the Steam Turbine with special reference to Marine Work,” «I»Proc.«/I» 
«I»Inst. Engineers & Shipbuilders in Scotland«/I» (October 1905). On this subject see also Reed, “The Design of Marine Steam Turbines,” «I»Proc. Inst. Civ. Eng.«/I» (February 1909).«/FN» for the whole range from an admission pressure which may be nearly 200 lb per sq. in. down to condenser pressure. 
PAGE:869The increased diameter at the low-pressure end not only allows 
the steam velocity to be increased but by enlarging the annulus 
enables a sufficient area of passage to be provided without unduly 
lengthening the blades. In the very last stages of the expansion, 
however, the volume becomes so great that it is not practicable to 
provide sufficient area by lengthening the blades, and the blades 
there are accordingly shaped so as to face in a more nearly axial 
direction and are spaced more widely apart. 

The area of the steam passage depends on the angle of the blade. 
If the blades were indefinitely thin it would be equal to the area 
of the annulus multiplied by the sine of the angle of discharge, and 
in practice this is subject to a deduction for the thickness of the blade 
on the discharge side, as well as to a correction for leakage over 
the tips. Generally the angle of discharge is about 22½°; and the 
effective area for the passage of steam is about one-third of the area 
of the annulus. 

Fig. 61 A shows a representative pair of fixed and moving 
blades of a Parsons turbine, and fig. 61 B the corresponding 
velocity diagram for the steam, neglecting effects of friction. 
V₁ is the exit velocity from the fixed blades, the delivery 
edges of which are tangent to the direction of V₁.

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 61.png|width=390}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 61.«/CTR»

The blade 
velocity is 𝑢 which is ½V₁. V₂ is consequently the relative 
velocity with which the steam enters the moving blades. Approximately,
the back surface of these blades is parallel to V₂, but the 
blades are so thick near the entrance side that their front faces have 
a considerably different slope and there is therefore some shock at 
entrance. In passing through the moving blades the relative 
velocity of the steam over the blades changes from V₂ to V₃. Allowing
for the velocity 𝑢 of the blades themselves, this corresponds to 
an absolute velocity V₄, with which the steam enters the next set of 
fixed blades. In these blades it is again accelerated to V₁ and so on.

126. «I»Calculation of Velocity at each Stage«/I».—The acceleration of 
the steam in each row of blades results from a definite heat drop. 
Or, if we look at the matter from the point of view of the pressure-volume
diagram, the acceleration results from the work done on the 
steam by itself during a drop δ𝑝 in its pressure. The amount of 
this work per pound is 𝑣δ𝑝 where 𝑣 is the actual volume per pound. 
It is convenient in practice to write this in the form (𝑝𝑣)δ𝑝/𝑝, for 
the product 𝑝𝑣 changes only slowly as expansion proceeds. In 
designing a turbine a table of the values of 𝑝𝑣 throughout the range 
of pressures from admission to exhaust is prepared, and from these 
numbers it is easy to calculate the work done at each stage in the 
expansion, the pressure 𝑝 and drop in pressure δ𝑝 being known. 
In the ideal case with no losses we should have 

«CTR»(V₁²−V₄²)/2𝑔=(𝑝𝑣)δ𝑝/𝑝«/CTR»
or V₁²=2𝑔(𝑝𝑣)δ𝑝/𝑝+V₄²

where V₄ is the velocity before the acceleration due to the drop δ𝑝 
and V₁ is the velocity after. 

But under actual conditions the gain of velocity is less than this, 
owing to blade friction, shock and other sources of loss. The actual 
velocity depends on the efficiency and on the shape and angles of 
the blades. It appears that under the conditions which hold in 
practice in Parsons turbines it is very nearly such that 
«CTR»V₁²=2𝑔(𝑝𝑣)δ𝑝/𝑝.«/CTR»

In this formula, which serves as a means of estimating approximately
the velocity for purposes of design, it is to be understood
that in calculating the product 𝑝𝑣 the volume to be taken is that
which is actually reached during expansion. The actual volume
is affected both by friction and by leakage and is intermediate in
value between the volume in adiabatic expansion and the volume
corresponding to saturation. In the case of a turbine of 70% efficiency
the actual wetness of the steam is, according to Mr Parsons’s
experience, about 55% of that due to adiabatic expansion in the 
early stages and 60% in the latest stages. In preparing the table
of values of 𝑝𝑣 figures are accordingly to be taken intermediate
between those for saturated steam and for steam expanded adiabatically,
and from these is found as above the velocity for any given
drop in pressure, and also the volume per pound, for which at each
stage in the expansion provision has to be made in designing the 
effective areas of passage. 

The blade speeds used in Parsons turbines rarely exceed 350 ft. 
per second and are generally a good deal less. In marine forms, 
where the number of revolutions per minute is limited by considerations
of efficiency in the action of the screw propeller, the blade 
speeds generally range from about 120 to 150 ft. per second, though 
speeds as low as 80 ft. per second have been used. 

127. «I»Parsons Marine Turbines«/I».—Marine turbines are divided 
into distinct high and low pressure parts through which the 
steam passes in series, each in a separate casing and each driving 
a separate propeller shaft. The most usual arrangement is to 
have three propeller shafts; the middle is driven by the high 
pressure portion of the turbine, and the steam which has done 
duty in this is then equally divided between two precisely 
similar low pressure turbines, each on one of two wing shafts. 
The rotor drum of each turbine has a uniform diameter throughout
its length, but the casing is stepped to allow the lengths of 
the blades to increase as the pressure falls. 

The casing which contains each of the two low pressure 
turbines contains also a turbine for running astern, so that either 
or both of the two wing shafts may be reversed. Steam is 
admitted to the reversing turbine direct from the boiler, the 
centre shaft being then idle. Each astern-driven turbine 
consists of a comparatively short series of rings of blades, set 
for running in the reversed direction, developing enough power 
for this purpose but making no pretensions to high efficiency. 
The astern turbine, being connected to the condenser, runs 
«I»in vacuo«/I» when the ahead turbine is in use and consequently 
wastes little or no power. 

«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 62.png|width=780}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 62.—Parsons Marine Turbine : High Pressure Part.«BR»
Upper half : sectional elevation. Lower half : external view.«/CTR»
Figs. 62 and 63 are sections of the high pressure and low pressure 
portions of a typical Parsons marine steam turbine, as designed 
for the three-shaft arrangement in which the low pressure portion 
is duplicated. In each figure A is the fixed casing and B is the 
revolving drum. Steam enters the high pressure turbine (fig. 62) 
through J and passes out through H. There are 4 “expansions” 
or steps, with 9 stages or double rows of blades in the first, 9 in thePAGE:870second, 8 in the third and 8 in the fourth, or 34 stages in all. The low pressure turbine (fig. 63) comprises 28 more stages stepped as shown in the figure. The reversing turbine which is seen on the left-hand side in fig. 63, at the place where the rotor is reduced in diameter, has 26 stages in 4 steps. These turbines have a total normal horse power of 12,500, and run at 450 revolutions per minute. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 63.png|width=1000}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 63.—Parsons Marine Turbine: Low Pressure and Astern Part.«BR»
Upper half: sectional elevation. Lower half: external view.«/CTR»
128. «I»Longitudinal Forces in Marine Turbines«/I».—In a marine steam 
turbine the size of the dummy is reduced so that instead of balancing the whole steam thrust it leaves a resultant force which nearly balances the propeller thrust. Consequently only a small thrust block has to be provided to take any difference there may be between these forces. This thrust block is shown on the extreme right in each figure, beyond the gland and bearing. The dummy (at D in the figures) is made up of some 22 rings of brass fixed in the case in close proximity to the faces of projecting rings on the rotor (fig. 64) with a longitudinal clearance of 0·015 in. 
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 64, 65.png|width=362}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 64. «SC»Fig«/SC». 65.«/CTR»

This form of dummy is suitable for the end near the thrust block, where exact longitudinal adjustment is possible, but the astern turbine in fig. 63 
requires a different form because some longitudinal play is necessarily
brought about there by differences in expansion of the rotor 
and stator. Accordingly, the astern dummy is of the “radial”
form shown in fig. 65 where the fine clearance is round the circumference
of the brass rings set in the rotor and stator alternately. The 
whole dummy includes about sixteen of these rings. 

129. «I»Shaft Arrangement of Marine Turbines«/I».—Fig. 66 shows the «HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable" style="float:left;width:260px"><tr><td>{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 66.png|width=260}}</td></tr><tr><td>«SC»Fig«/SC». 66.</td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»
usual three-shaft arrangement, with two low pressure turbines in 
parallel on the wing 
shafts, and one high 
pressure turbine, with 
which they are jointly 
in series, on the middle 
shaft. In very large 
vessels four shafts are 
used, and the turbines 
form two independent 
sets one on each side of 
the ship. The outer 
shaft on each side carries 
a high pressure turbine, 
and the inner shaft carries
the corresponding 
low pressure turbine and 
also a turbine for reversing.
This arrangement is followed in the “Lusitania” and
“Mauretania” where the low pressure turbines have drums 188 in.
in diameter, are about 17½ ft. in diameter over all and 50 ft. long, and weigh 300 tons. Each turbine has 8 steps with about 16 stages in each step in the high pressure turbine and 8 in the low. They run at 180 revolutions per minute. 

130. «I»Cruising Turbines in War«/I»-«I»Ships«/I».—In turbines for the propulsion
of war-ships it is necessary to secure a fairly high economy at speeds greatly short of those for which the turbines are designed when working at full power, for the normal cruising speed of such vessels is usually from half to two-thirds of the speed at full power.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 67.png|width=280}}

«BR»
«SC»Fig«/SC». 67.«/CTR»
To counterbalance the reduced blade velocity, when running under
these conditions, the number of rows of blades has in some cases 
been augmented by adding what are called cruising turbines, which 
are connected in series with the main turbines when the ship is to 
run at cruising speed. In the three-shaft arrangement the cruising 
turbines are fitted on the wing propeller shafts, which carry also 
the low pressure and astern turbines. They form a high and intermediate
pressure pair through which the steam may pass in seriesPAGE:871before going on to the main turbines. This arrangement is shown 
in fig. 67, where C.H.P. and C.I.P. are the two cruising turbines. In cruising at low speeds the whole group of turbines is used in series: when the speed is increased a larger amount of power is got by admitting steam direct to the second cruiser turbine; and finally at the highest speed both cruiser turbines are cut out. The arrangement shown in fig. 67 has been used in some torpedo-boat destroyers and small cruisers. In some large cruisers and battleships a four-shaft system is employed and a longitudinal bulkhead divides the whole group into two independent sets. On each of the outer shafts there is a high-pressure ahead and also a separate high-pressure astern turbine. On each of the inner shafts there is a combined low-pressure ahead and astern turbine and also a cruising turbine. All four shafts can be reversed. 

131. «I»Application of Parsons Turbine«/I».—The Parsons was the 
earliest steam turbine to be made commercially successful, and 
it has found a wider range of application than any other. Its 
chief employment is as an electric generator and as a marine 
engine, but it has been put to a considerable number of other 
uses. One of these is to drive fans and blowers for exhausting 
air, or for delivering it under pressure. The turbine-driven 
fans and blowers designed by Mr Parsons are themselves compound
turbines driven reversed in such a manner as to produce
a cumulative difference in the pressure of the air that is 
to be impelled. 

An interesting field for the application of steam turbines 
is to economize the use of steam in non-condensing engines of the 
older type, by turning their exhaust to the supply of a turbine 
provided with an efficient condenser. It is a characteristic 
of the turbine that it is able to make effective use of low pressure
steam. No condensing piston and cylinder can compete with it
in this respect; for the turbine continues to extract heat energy
usefully when the pressure has fallen so low that frictional losses
and the inconveniences attaching to excessive volume make it
impracticable to continue expansion to any good purpose under
a piston. 

132. «I»Parsons Vacuum Augmenter«/I».—For the same reason it 
is especially important in the turbine to secure a good vacuum: 
any increase in condenser pressure during a turbine test at 
once shows its influence in making a marked reduction of steam 
economy. In the region of usual condenser pressures a difference
of 1 in. changes the steam consumption by about 5%. 
With this in mind Mr Parsons has invented a device called a 
vacuum augmenter, shown in fig. 68.
«CTR»{{IMG:EB1911 Steam Engine Fig. 68.png|width=400}}

«BR»
«FS[92%]»«SC»Fig«/SC». 68.—Parsons Vacuum Augmenter.«/FS»«/CTR»

The condensed water
passes to the air-pump through a pipe bent to form a water-seal.
The air from the condenser is extracted by means of a
small steam jet pump which delivers it into an “augmenter
condenser” in which the steam of this jet is condensed. The
vacuum in the augmenter condenser is directly produced by
the action of the air-pump. The effect of this device is to
maintain in the main condenser a higher vacuum than that
in the augmenter condenser, and consequently a higher vacuum
than the air-pump by itself is competent to produce. This is
done with a small expenditure of steam in the jet, but the effect
of the augmented vacuum on the efficiency of the turbine is so
beneficial that a considerable net gain results.

133. «I»Rateau and Zölly Turbines«/I».—Professor Rateau has 
designed a form of steam turbine which combines some of the 
features of the Parsons turbine with those of the De Laval. He 
divides the whole drop into some twelve or twenty-four stages 
and at each stage employs an impulse wheel substantially of 
the De Laval type, the steam passing from one stage to the 
next through a diaphragm with nozzles. This form can scarcely 
be called an independent type. It has been applied as an 
exhaust steam turbine in conjunction with a regenerative thermal 
accumulator which enables steam to be delivered steadily to 
the turbine although supplied from an intermittent source. The 
Zölly turbine, which has found considerable application on a 
large scale, acts in a precisely similar manner to that of Rateau: 
it differs only in mechanical details. 

134. «I»Combined Reciprocating and Turbine Engines«/I».—The 
combination of a reciprocating engine with a turbine is suggested
by Parsons for the propulsion of cargo or other low-speed 
steamers where the speed of the screw shafts cannot be made 
high enough to admit of a sufficient blade velocity for the 
efficient treatment in the turbine of high-pressure steam. 
With a small speed of revolution blade velocity can be got 
only by increasing the diameter of the spindle, and a point 
is soon reached when this not only involves an unduly large 
size and weight of turbine, but also makes the blades become 
so short (by augmenting the circumference of the annulus) 
that the leakage loss over the tips becomes excessive. This 
consideration confines the practical application of turbines to 
vessels whose speed is over say 15 knots. But by restricting the 
turbine to the lower part of the pressure range and using a piston 
and cylinder engine for the upper part a higher economy is 
possible than could be reached by the use of either form of 
engine alone, the turbine being specially well adapted to make 
the most of the final stages of expansion, whereas the ordinary 
reciprocating engine in such vessels makes little or no use of 
pressure below about 7 lb per sq. in. 

135. «I»Consumption of Steam in the Parsons Turbine«/I».—In large 
sizes the Parsons turbine requires less steam per horse-power-hour 
than any form of reciprocating engine using steam under similar 
conditions. Trials made in April 1900, by the present writer, of 
a 2000 h.p. turbine coupled to an electric generator showed a consumption
of 18¼ lb per kilowatt hour, with steam at 155 lb per sq. in. 
superheated 84° F. Since 1 kilowatt is 1·34 h.p. this consumption 
is equal to 13·6 lb per electrical horse-power-hour. The best piston 
engines when driving dynamos convert about 84% of their indicated 
power into electric power. Hence the above result is as good, in 
the relation of electric power to steam consumption, as would be 
got from a piston engine using only 11·4 lb of steam per indicated 
horse-power-hour. An important characteristic of the steam turbine 
is that it retains a high efficiency under comparatively light loads. 
The figures below illustrate this by giving the results of a series of 
trials of the same machine under various loads. 

«HTMLTABLE:<table class="figtable"><tr><td> Load in kilowatts.</td><td></td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center"> 1450 </td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center"> 1250 </td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center"> 1000 </td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center">750</td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center">500</td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center">250</td></tr><tr><td> Steam used per kilo watt-hour in pounds </td><td>«BRACE2[2|r]»</td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center">18·1</td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center">18·5</td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center">19·2</td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center"> 20·3 </td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center"> 22·6 </td><td style="border-left:1px solid;text-align:center"> 34·0 </td></tr></table>«/HTMLTABLE»

Still better results have been obtained in more recent examples, 
in turbines of greater power. A Parsons turbine, rated as of 3500 
but working up to over 5000 kilowatts tested in 1907 at the Carville power station of the Newcastle-on-Tyne Electric Supply Company, showed a consumption of only 13·19 lb of steam per kilowatt-hour, with steam of 200 lb pressure by gauge and 67° C. superheat (temperature 264·7° C.), the vacuum being 29·04 in. (barometer 30 in.). It is interesting to compare this performance with the ideal amount of work obtainable per pound of steam, or in other words with the ideal “heat drop.” At the temperature and pressure of supply the total heat I₁ is 709. After expansion to the pressure corresponding to the stated vacuum (0·96 in.) the total heat of the wet mixture would be 486, the dryness being then 0·792, if the expansion took place under ideal adiabatic conditions. Hence the heat drop I₁−I₂ is 223 units, and this represents the work ideally obtainable under the actual conditions as to temperature and pressure of supply and exhaust. Since 1 kilowatt-hour is 1896 thermal units (lb–degree C.), each pound of steam was generating an amount of electrical energy equivalent to 1896/13·19 or 143·7 thermal units, and the electric
output consequently corresponds to 64½% of the ideal work. If 
we allow for the loss in the electric generator by taking the electrical output as 92% of the mechanical power, this implies that 70% of the ideal work in the steam was mechanically utilized. 

136. «I»Torsion Meters for Power«/I».—No measurement corresponding to the “indicating” of a piston engine is possible with aPAGE:872steam turbine. In the tests that have been quoted the useful 
output was determined by electrical means. Direct measurements
of the useful mechanical power (the “brake” power) 
may, however, be obtained by applying a torsion dynamometer 
to the shaft. Devices are accordingly used in marine turbines 
for determining the horse-power from observations of the 
elastic twist in a portion of the propeller shaft as it revolves. 
In Denny & Johnson’s torsion meter two light gun-metal wheels 
are fixed on the shaft as far apart as is practicable, generally 
15 or 20 ft., and their relative angular displacement is found 
by comparing the inductive effects produced on fixed coils by 
magnets which are carried on the wheels. In Hopkinson & 
Thring’s torsion meter a short length of shaft—a foot or so—suffices. A small mirror is carried by a collar fixed to the shaft, and a second collar fixed a little way along is geared to the mirror in such a way as to deflect the mirror to an extent proportional to the twist: the deflexion is read by means of a lamp and scale fixed alongside. As the shaft revolves the light reflected from the mirror is momentarily seen at each revolution 
and its position along the scale is easily read. 