PAGE:933(ОҳОҝП…ОәП…ОҙОҜОҙО·ПӮ), Athenian historian. Materials for his biography are scanty, and the facts are of interest chiefly as aids to the appreciation of his lifeвҖҷs labour, the В«IВ»History of the Peloponnesian WarВ«/IВ». The older view that he was probably born in or about 471 В«SCВ»B.C.В«/SCВ», is based on a passage of Aulus Gellius, who says that in 431 Hellanicus вҖңseems to have beenвҖқ sixty-five years of age, Herodotus fifty-three and Thucydides forty (В«IВ»Noct. attВ«/IВ». xv. 23). The authority for this statement was Pamphila, a woman of Greek extraction, who compiled biographical and historical notices in the reign of Nero. The value of her testimony is, however, negligible, and modern criticism inclines to a later date, about 460В«FN:Christ (В«IВ»Gesch. der griech. LittВ«/IВ».) gives the date of birth as вҖңabout 455.вҖқВ«/FNВ» (see Busolt, В«IВ»Gr. GeschВ«/IВ». iii., pt. 2, p. 621). ThucydidesвҖҷ father Olorus, a citizen of Athens, belonged to a family which derived wealth and influence from the possession of gold-mines at ScaptД“ HylД“, on the Thracian coast opposite Thasos, and was a relative of his elder namesake, the Thracian prince, whose daughter Hegesipyle married the great Miltiades, so that Cimon, son of Miltiades, was possibly a connexion of Thucydides (see Busolt, В«IВ»ibid.В«/IВ», p. 618). It was in the vault of the Cimonian family at Athens, and near the remains of CimonвҖҷs sister Elpinice, that Plutarch saw the grave of Thucydides. Thus the fortune of birth secured three signal advantages to the future historian: he was rich; he had two homesвҖ”one at Athens, the other in ThraceвҖ”no small aid to a comprehensive study of the conditions under which the Peloponnesian War was waged; and his family connexions were likely to bring him from his early years into personal intercourse with the men who were shaping the history of his time.

The development of Athens during the middle of the 5th century was, in itself, the best education which such a mind as that of Thucydides could have received. The expansion and consolidation of Athenian power was completed, and the inner resources of the city were being applied to the embellishment and ennoblement of Athenian life (see В«LN:Cimon|CimonВ«/LNВ»; В«LN:Pericles|PericlesВ«/LNВ»). Yet the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» tells us nothing of the literature, the art or the social life under whose influences its author had grown up. The вҖңFuneral OrationвҖқ contains, indeed, his general testimony to the value and the charm of those influences. But he leaves us to supply all examples and details for ourselves. Beyond a passing reference to public вҖңfestivals,вҖқ and to вҖңbeautiful surroundings in private life,вҖқ he makes no attempt to define those вҖңrecreations for the spiritвҖқ which the Athenian genius had provided in such abundance. He alludes to the newly-built Parthenon only as containing the treasury; to the statue of Athena Parthenos which it enshrined, only on account of the gold which, at extreme need, could be detached from the image; to the Propylaea and other buildings with which Athens had been adorned under Pericles, only as works which had reduced the surplus of funds available for the war. He makes no reference to Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes; the architect Ictinus; the sculptor Pheidias; the physician Hippocrates; the philosophers Anaxagoras and Socrates. Herodotus, if he had dealt with this period, would have found countless occasions for invaluable digressions on men and manners, on letters and art; and we might almost be tempted to ask whether his more genial, if laxer, method does not indeed correspond better with a liberal conception of the historianвҖҷs office. No one can do full justice to Thucydides, or appreciate the true completeness of his work, who has not faced this question, and found the answer to it.

It would be a hasty judgment which inferred from the omissions of the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» that its authorвҖҷs interests were exclusively political. Thucydides was not writing the history of a period. His subject was an eventвҖ”the Peloponnesian WarвҖ”a war, as he believed, of unequalled importance, alike in its direct results and in its political significance for all time. To his task, thus defined, he brought an intense concentration of all his faculties. He worked with a constant desire to make each successive incident of the war as clear as possible. To take only two instances: there is nothing in literature more graphic than his description of the plague at Athens, or than the whole narrative of the Sicilian expedition. But the same temper made him resolute in excluding irrelevant topics. The social life of the time, the literature and the art did not belong to his subject.

The biography which bears the name of Marcellinus states that Thucydides was the disciple of Anaxagoras in philosophy and of Antiphon in rhetoric. There is no evidence to confirm this tradition. But Thucydides and Antiphon at least belong to the same rhetorical school and represent the same early stage of Attic prose. Both writers used words of an antique or decidedly poetical cast; both point verbal contrasts by insisting on the precise difference between terms of similar import; and both use metaphors somewhat bolder than were congenial to Greek prose in its riper age. The differences, on the other hand, between the style of Thucydides and that of Antiphon arise chiefly from two general causes. First, Antiphon wrote for hearers, Thucydides for readers; the latter, consequently, can use a degree of condensation and a freedom in the arrangement of words which would have been hardly possible for the former. Again, the thought of Thucydides is often more complex than any which Antiphon undertook to interpret; and the greater intricacy of the historianвҖҷs style exhibits the endeavour to express each thought.В«FN:See JebbвҖҷs В«IВ»Attic OratorsВ«/IВ», i. 35.В«/FNВ» Few things in the history of literary prose are more interesting than to watch that vigorous mind in its struggle to mould a language of magnificent but immature capabilities. The obscurity with which Thucydides has sometimes been reproached often arises from the very clearness with which a complex idea is present to his mind, and his strenuous effort to present it in its entirety. He never sacrifices thought to language, but he will sometimes sacrifice language to thought. A student may always be consoled by the reflection that he is not engaged in unravelling a mere rhetorical tangle. Every light on the sense will be a light on the words; and when, as is not seldom the case, Thucydides comes victoriously out of this struggle of thought and language, having achieved perfect expression of his meaning in a sufficiently lucid form, then his style rises into an intellectual brilliancyвҖ”thoroughly manly, and also penetrated with intense feelingвҖ”which nothing in Greek prose literature surpasses.

The uncertainty as to the date of ThucydidesвҖҷ birth renders futile any discussion of the fact that before 431 he took no prominent part in Athenian politics. If he was born in 455, the fact needs no explanation; if in 471, it is possible that his opportunities were modified by the necessity of frequent visits to Thrace, where the management of such an important property as the gold-mines must have claimed his presence. The manner in which he refers to his personal influence in that region is such as to suggest that he had sometimes resided there (iv. 105, 1). He was at Athens in the spring of 430, when the plague broke out. If his account of the symptoms has not enabled physicians to agree on a diagnosis of the malady, it is at least singularly full and vivid. He had himself been attacked by the plague; and, as he briefly adds, вҖңhe had seen others suffer.вҖқ The tenor of his narrative would warrant the inference that he had been one of a few who were active in ministering to the sufferers.

The turning-point in the life of Thucydides came in the winter of 424. He was then forty seven (or, according to Busolt, about thirty-six), and for the first time he is found holding an official position. He was one of two generals entrusted with the command of the regions towards Thrace (П„О¬ ОӯП„ОҜ ОёПҒО¬ОәО·ПӮ), a phrase which denotes the whole Thracian seaboard from MacedoniaPAGE:934eastward to the vicinity of the Thracian Chersonese, though 
often used with more special reference to the Chalcidic peninsula.
His colleague in the command was Eucles. About the 
end of November 424 Eucles was in Amphipolis, the stronghold 
of Athenian power in the north-west. To guard it with all 
possible vigilance was a matter of peculiar urgency at that 
moment. The ablest of Spartan leaders, В«LN:Brasidas|BrasidasВ«/LNВ» (В«IВ»q.vВ«/IВ».), was in 
the Chalcidic peninsula, where he had already gained rapid 
success; and part of the population between that peninsula 
and Amphipolis was known to be disaffected to Athens. Under 
such circumstances we might have expected that Thucydides, 
who had seven ships of war with him, would have been ready to 
co-operate with Eucles. It appears, however, that, with his 
ships, he was at the island of Thasos when Brasidas suddenly 
appeared before Amphipolis. Eucles sent in all haste for Thucydides, who arrived with his ships from Thasos just in time to beat off the enemy from Eion at the mouth of the Strymon, but 
not in time to save Amphipolis. The profound vexation and 
dismay felt at Athens found expression in the punishment of 
Thucydides, who was exiled. Cleon is said to have been the prime 
mover in his condemnation; and this is likely enough. 

From 423 to 404 Thucydides lived on his property in Thrace, 
but much of his time appears to have been spent in travel. 
He visited the countries of the Peloponnesian allies вҖ” recommended to them by his quality as an exile from Athens; and he thus enjoyed the rare advantage of contemplating the war from 
various points of view. He speaks of the increased leisure 
which his banishment secured to his study of events. He refers 
partly, doubtless, to detachment from Athenian politics, partly 
also, we may suppose, to the opportunity of visiting places 
signalized by recent events and of examining their topography. 
The local knowledge which is often apparent in his Sicilian books 
may have been acquired at this period. The mind of Thucydides 
was naturally judicial, and his impartialityвҖ”which seems 
almost superhuman by contrast with Xenophon's В«IВ»HellenicaВ«/IВ»вҖ” 
was in some degree a result of temperament. But it cannot 
be doubted that the evenness with which he holds the scales 
was greatly assisted by his experience during these years of 
exile. 

His own words make it clear that he returned to Athens, at 
least for a time, in 404, though the precise date is uncertain. 
The older view (cf. Classen) was that he returned some six 
months after Athens surrendered to Lysander. More probably 
he was recalled by the special resolution carried by Oenobius 
prior to the acceptance of Lysander's terms (Busolt, ibid., p. 628). 
He remained at Athens only a short time, and retired to his 
property in Thrace, where he lived till his death, working at his 
В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ». The preponderance of testimony certainly goes to 
show that he died in Thrace, and by violence. It would seem 
that, when he wrote chapter 116 of his third book, he was 
ignorant of an eruption of Etna which took place in 396. There 
is, indeed, strong reason for thinking that he did not live later 
than 399. His remains were brought to Athens and laid in the 
vault of Cimon's family, where Plutarch (В«IВ»CimonВ«/IВ», 4) saw their 
resting-place. The abruptness with which the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» breaks 
off agrees with the story of a sudden death. The historian's 
daughter is said to have saved the unfinished work and to have 
placed it in the hands of an editor. This editor, according to 
one account, was Xenophon, to whom Diogenes LaГ«rtius (ii. 6, 
13) assigns the credit of having вҖң brought the work into reputation, when he might have suppressed it.вҖқ The tradition is, however, very doubtful; it may have been suggested by a feeling 
that no one then living could more appropriately have discharged 
the office of literary executor than the writer who, in his В«IВ»HellenicaВ«/IВ», continued the narrative. 

В«IВ»The HistoryВ«/IВ». вҖ” At the outset of the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» Thucydides indicates 
his general conception of his work, and states the principles which 
governed its composition. His purpose had been formed at the 
very beginning of the war, in the conviction that it would prove 
more important than any event of which Greeks had record. The 
leading belligerents, Athens and Sparta, were both in the highest 
condition of effective equipment. The whole Hellenic worldвҖ” 
including Greek settlements outside of Greece properвҖ”was divided 
into two parties) either actively helping one of the two combatants 
or meditating such action. Nor was the movement confined within 
even the widest limits of Hellas; the вҖңbarbarianвҖқ world also was 
affected by itвҖ”the non-Hellenic populations of Thrace, Macedonia, 
Epirus, Sicily and, finally, the Persian kingdom itself. The aim 
of Thucydides was to preserve an accurate record of this war, not 
only in view of the intrinsic interest and importance of the facts, 
but also in order that these facts might be permanent sources of 
political teaching to posterity. His hope was, as he says, that his 
В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» would be found profitable by вҖң those who desire an exact 
knowledge of the past as a key to the future, which in all probability will repeat or resemble the past. The work is meant to be a possession for ever, not the rhetorical triumph of an hour.вҖқ As 
this context shows, the oft-quoted phrase, вҖң a possession for ever,вҖқ 
had, in its author's meaning, a more definite import than any mere 
anticipation of abiding fame for his В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ». It referred to the 
permanent value of the lessons which his В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» contained. 

Thucydides stands alone among the men of his own days, and has 
no superior of any age, in the width of mental grasp which could 
seize the general significance of particular events. The political 
education of mankind began in Greece, and in the time of Thucydides their political life was still young. Thucydides knew only the small city-commonwealth on the one hand, and on the other 
the vast barbaric kingdom; and yet, as has been well said of him, 
вҖңthere is hardly a problem in the science of government which 
the statesman will not find, if not solved, at any rate handled, in 
the pages of this universal master.вҖқ В«FN:Freeman, В«IВ»Historical EssaysВ«/IВ», 2nd series, vol. iii. ; on the general questions of the structure of the work and the view of the war which it represents see В«LN:Peloponnesian War|Peloponnesian WarВ«/LNВ»; and В«LN:Greece|GreeceВ«/LNВ»; В«IВ»Ancient HistoryВ«/IВ», В§ Authorities.В«/FNВ»

Such being the spirit in which he approached his task, it is 
interesting to inquire what were the points which he himself considered to be distinctive in his method of executing it.
В«SHВ»His Predecessors.В«/SHВ» 
His Greek predecessors in the recording of events had 
been, he conceived, of two classes. First, there were 
the epic poets, with Homer at their head, whose characteristic 
tendency, in the eyes of Thucydides, is to exaggerate the greatness 
or splendour of things past. Secondly, there were the Ionian prose 
writers whom he calls вҖңchroniclersвҖқ (see В«LN:Logographi|LogographiВ«/LNВ»), whose 
general object was to diffuse a knowledge of legends preserved by 
oral tradition and of written documentsвҖ”usually lists of officials 
or genealogiesвҖ”preserved in public archives; and they published 
their materials as they found them, without criticism. Thucydides 
describes their work by the word ОҫП…vП„О№ОёОӯП…ОұО№, but his own by 
ОҫП…ОіОіПҒО¬ОҰОөО№П…вҖ”the difference between the terms answering to that 
between compilation of a somewhat mechanical kind and historical 
composition in a higher sense. The vice of the вҖңchroniclers,вҖқ 
in his view, is that they cared only for popularity, and took no pains 
to make their narratives trustworthy. Herodotus was presumably 
regarded by him as in the same general category. 

In contrast with these predecessors Thucydides has subjected 
his materials to the most searching scrutiny. The ruling principle 
of his work has been strict adherence to carefully 
В«SHВ»Distinctive Aim of Thucydides.В«/SHВ»
verified facts. вҖң As to the deeds done in the war,
I have not thought myself at liberty to record them on 
hearsay from the first informant or on arbitrary conjecture. My account rests either on personal knowledge or on 
the closest possible scrutiny of each statement made by others. 
The process of research was laborious, because conflicting accounts 
were given by those who had witnessed the several events, as 
partiality swayed or memory served them.вҖқ

It might be supposed that the speeches which Thucydides has introduced into his В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» conflict with this standard of scientific accuracy; it is, therefore, well to consider their natureВ«SHВ»The Speeches.В«/SHВ» and purpose rather closely. The speeches constitute between a fourth and a fifth part of the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ». If they were eliminated, an admirable narrative would indeed remain, with a few comments, usually brief, on the more striking characters and events. But we should lose all the most vivid light on the inner workings of the Greek political mind, on the motives of the actors and the arguments which they used вҖ” in a word, on the whole play of contemporary feeling and opinion. To the speeches is due in no small measure the imperishable intellectual interest of the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ», since it is chiefly by the speeches that the facts of the Peloponnesian War are so lit up with keen thought as to become illustrations of general laws, and to acquire a permanent suggestiveness for the student of politics. When Herodotus made his persons hold conversations or deliver speeches, he was following the precedent of epic poetry; his tone is usually colloquial rather than rhetorical; he is merely making thought and motive vivid in the way natural to a simple age. Thucydides is the real founder of the tradition by which historians were so long held to be warranted in introducing set speeches of their own composition. His own account of his practice is given in the following words: вҖңAs to the speeches made on the eve of the war, or in its course, I have found it difficult to retain a memory of the precise words which I had heard spoken; and so it was with those who brought me reportsPAGE:935But I have made the persons say what it seemed to me most opportune for them to say in view of each situation; at the same time I have adhered as closely as possible to the general sense of what 
was actually said.вҖқ So far as the language of the speeches is 
concerned, then, Thucydides plainly avows that it is mainly or 
wholly his own. As a general rule, there is little attempt to mark 
different styles. The case of Pericles, whom Thucydides must 
have repeatedly heard, is probably an exception; the Thucydidean 
speeches of Pericles offer several examples of that bold imagery 
which Aristotle and Plutarch agree in ascribing to him, while the 
вҖңFuneral Oration,вҖқ especially, has a certain majesty of rhythm, 
a certain union of impetuous movement with lofty grandeur, which 
the historian has given to no other speaker. Such strongly marked 
characteristics as the curt bluntness of the Spartan ephor SthenelaГҜdas, or the insolent vehemence of Alcibiades, are also indicated. 
But the dramatic truth of the speeches generally resides in the 
matter, not in the form. In regard to those speeches which were 
delivered at Athens before his banishment in 424вҖ”and seven such speeches are contained in the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ»вҖ”Thucydides could rely either on his own recollection or on the sources accessible to a resident citizen. In these cases there is good reason to believe that he has reproduced the substance of what was actually said. In other cases he had to trust to more or less imperfect reports of the вҖңgeneral senseвҖқ; and in some instances, no doubt, the speech represents simply his own conception of what it would have been вҖңmost opportuneвҖқ to say. The most evident of such instances occur in the addresses of leaders to their troops. The historianвҖҷs aim in these military haranguesвҖ”which are usually shortвҖ”is to bring out the points of a strategical situation; a modern writer 
would have attained the object by comments prefixed or subjoined 
to his account of the battle. The comparative indifference of 
Thucydides to dramatic verisimilitude in these military orations 
is curiously shown by the fact that the speech of the general on 
the one side is sometimes as distinctly a reply to the speech of the 
general on the other as if they had been delivered in debate. We 
may be sure, however, that, wherever Thucydides had any authentic 
clue to the actual tenor of a speech, he preferred to follow that 
clue rather than to draw on his own invention. 

Why, however, did he not content himself with simply stating, in his own person, the arguments and opinions which he conceived 
to have been prevalent? The question must be viewed from the standpoint of a Greek in the 5th century В«SCВ»B.C.В«/SCВ» Epic poetry had then for many generations exercised 
В«SHВ»The Greek View.В«/SHВ» 
a powerful influence over the Greek mind. Homer had 
accustomed Greeks to look for two elements in any complete 
expression of human energyвҖ”first, an account of a manвҖҷs deeds, 
then an image of his mind in the report of his words. The Homeric 
heroes are exhibited both in action and in speech. Further, the 
contemporary readers of Thucydides were men habituated to a 
civic life in which public speech played an all-important part. 
Every adult citizen of a Greek democracy was a member of the 
assembly which debated and decided great issues. The law courts, 
the festivals, the drama, the market-place itself, ministered to the 
Greek love of animated description. To a Greek of that age a 
written history of political events would have seemed strangely 
insipid if speech вҖң in the first person вҖқ had been absent from it, 
especially if it did not offer some mirror of those debates which were 
inseparably associated with the central interests and the decisive 
moments of political life. In making historical persons say what 
they might have said, Thucydides confined that oratorical licence 
to the purpose which is its best justification: with him it is strictly 
dramatic, an aid to the complete presentment of action, by the 
vivid expression of ideas and arguments which were really current 
at the time. Among later historians who continued the practice, 
Polybius, Sallust and Tacitus most resemble Thucydides in this 
particular; while in the Byzantine historians, as in some moderns 
who followed classical precedent, the speeches were usually mere 
occasions for rhetorical display. BottaвҖҷs В«IВ»History of ItalyВ«/IВ» from 
1780 to 1814 affords one of the latest examples of the practice, 
which was peculiarly suited to the Italian genius. 

The present division of the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» into eight books is one which 
might well have proceeded from the author himself, as being a 
natural and convenient disposition of the contents. The first book, after a general introduction, sets forth 
the causes of the Peloponnesian War. The first nine 
В«SHВ»The Eight Books.В«/SHВ»
years of the war are contained in the second, third and 
fourth booksвҖ”three years in each. The fifth book contains the 
tenth year, followed by the interval of the вҖңinsecure peace.вҖқ The 
Sicilian expedition fills the sixth and seventh books The eighth 
books opens that last chapter of the struggle which is known as the 
вҖңDeceleanвҖқ or вҖңIonianвҖқ War, and breaks off abruptlyвҖ”in the 
middle of a sentence, indeedвҖ”in the year 411. 

The principal reason against believing that the division into 
eight books was made by Thucydides himself is the fact that a 
different division, into thirteen books, was also current 
in antiquity, as appears from Marcellinus (В§ 58). It is 
very improbableвҖ”indeed hardly conceivableвҖ”that this 
В«SHВ»Origin of that Division.В«/SHВ»
should have been the case if the eight-book division 
had come down from the hand of the author. We may infer, then, 
that the division of the work into eight books was introduced at 
AlexandriaвҖ”perhaps in the 3rd or 2nd century В«SCВ»B.C.В«/SCВ» That division 
was already familiar to the grammarians of the Augustan age. 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who recognizes it, has also another 
mode of indicating portions of the work, viz. by В«IВ»stichometriaВ«/IВ», or 
the number of lines which they contained. Thus, in the MS. 
which he used, the first 87 chapters of book i. contained about 
2000 lines (equivalent to about 1700 lines in BekkerвҖҷs stereotyped 
8vo text). (On the order of composition, see В«LN:Peloponnesian War|Peloponnesian WarВ«/LNВ», В«IВ»ad initВ«/IВ».; and В«LN:Greece|GreeceВ«/LNВ»: В«IВ»Ancient HistoryВ«/IВ», В§ Authorities). 

The division of the war by summers and winters (ОәОұП„О¬ ОҳОӯПҒОҝПӮ ОәОұОҜ ПҮОөО№ОјПҺП…Оұ)вҖ”the end of the winter being considered as the end of the 
yearвҖ”is perhaps the only one which Thucydides himself 
used, for there is no indication that he made any 
division of the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» into books. His вҖңsummerвҖқ В«SHВ»Mode of Reckoning Time.В«/SHВ»
includes spring and autumn and extends, generally speaking, from March or the beginning of April to the end of October. His вҖңwinterвҖқвҖ”November to February inclusiveвҖ”means practically the period during which military operations, by land and sea, are wholly or partly suspended. When he speaks of вҖңsummerвҖқ and вҖңwinterвҖқ as answering respectively to вҖңhalfвҖқ the year (v. 20, 3), the phrase is not to be pressed: it means merely that he divides his year into these two parts. The mode of reckoning is essentially a rough one, and is not to be viewed as if the commencement of summer or of winter could be precisely fixed to constant dates. 
For chronology, besides the festivals, he uses the Athenian list of 
archons, the Spartan list of ephors and the Argive list of priestesses of Hera. 

There is no reference to the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» of Thucydides in the extant 
Greek writers of the 4th century В«SCВ»B.C.В«/SCВ»; but Lucian has preserved a 
tradition of the enthusiasm with which it was studied by Demosthenes. 
The great orator is said to have copied it out eight times, 
or even to have learnt it by heart. The Alexandrian critics acknowledged 
Thucydides as a great master of Attic. Sallust, Cornelius 
Nepos, Cicero and Quintilian are among the Roman writers whose 
admiration for him can be traced in their work, or has been expressly 
recorded. The most elaborate ancient criticism on the 
diction and composition of Thucydides is contained in three essays 
by Dionysius of Halicarnassus. 

Among the best MSS. of Thucydides, the Codex vaticanus 126 (11th century) represents a recension made in the Alexandrian or Roman age. In the first six books the number of
passages in which the Vaticanus alone has preserved a true reading is comparatively small; in book vii. it is somewhat
В«SHВ»MSS., &c.В«/SHВ»
larger; in book viii. it is so large that here the Vaticanus, as compared with the other MSS., acquires the character of a revised text. Other important MSS. are the Palatinus 252 (11th century); the Casselanus (В«SCВ»A.D.В«/SCВ» 1252); the Augustanus monacensis 430 (В«SCВ»A.D.В«/SCВ» 1301). A collation, in books i., ii., of two Cambridge MSS. of the 15th century (Nn. 3, 18; Kk. 5, 19) has been published by Shilleto. Several 
Parisian MSS. (H. C. A. F.), and a Venetian MSS. (V.) collated by 
Arnold, also deserve mention. The Aldine edition was published 
in 1502. It was formerly supposed that there had been two Juntine editions. Shilleto, in the вҖңNoticeвҖқ prefixed to book i., first pointed out that the only Juntine edition was that of 1526, and that the belief in an earlier Juntine, of 1506, arose merely from the accidental omission of the word В«IВ»vicesimoВ«/IВ» in the Latin version of the imprint. Some papyrus fragments were published in Grenfell and HuntвҖҷs В«IВ»Oxyrhynchus papyriВ«/IВ» (1908), vi., which also contains an anonymous commentary (pub. 1st century) on Thuc. ii. 

The most generally useful edition is ClassenвҖҷs, in the Weidmann 
Series (1862вҖ“1878; new ed. by Steup, 1882вҖ“1892); each book can be 
obtained separately. ArnoldвҖҷs edition (1848вҖ“1851) contains much 
that is still valuable. For books i. and ii. ShilletoвҖҷs edition (1872вҖ“1876) 
furnishes a commentary which, though not full, deals admirably 
with many difficult points. Among other important complete 
editions, it is enough to name those of Duker, Bekker, Goeller, 
Poppo and KrГјger. For editions of separate books and selections 
(up to 1895) see J. B. MayorвҖҷs В«IВ»Guide to the Choice of Classical BooksВ«/IВ». 
Special mention may be made of those by E. C. Marchant. Later 
editions of the text are by H. Stuart Jones (1900вҖ“1901), in the Oxford 
В«IВ»Scriptorum classicorum bibliothecaВ«/IВ», and C. Hude (вҖңTeubner Series,вҖқ 
1901; ed. minor, 1903). BГ©tantвҖҷs lexicon to Thucydides (1843) is 
well executed. JowettвҖҷs translation (1883) is supplemented by 
a volume of notes. DaleвҖҷs version (Bohn) also deserves mention 
for its fidelity, as CrawleyвҖҷs (1876) for its vigour. В«IВ»HellenicaВ«/IВ» (1880) 
contains an essay on вҖңThe Speeches of Thucydides,вҖқ which has been 
translated into German (see Eduard Meyer, В«IВ»Forschungen zur altenВ«/IВ»
В«IВ»GeschichteВ«/IВ», Bd. ii. pp. 269-436). The best clue to Thucydidean
bibliography is in EngelmannвҖҷs В«IВ»Scriptores graeciВ«/IВ» (1880), supplemented
by the articles by G. Meyer, in BursianвҖҷs В«IВ»JahresberichtВ«/IВ»,
(1895) lxxix., (1897) lxxxviii. Busolt, В«IВ»Griechische GeschichteВ«/IВ», iii. 
616вҖ“693, is invaluable. For the life of Thucydides, U. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, вҖңDie Thukydidcs-Legende,вҖқ В«IВ»HermesВ«/IВ», (1878) xii., 
is all important. All works on ancient Greek History contain 
discussions of Thucydides, and an interesting criticism is that of 
J. B. Bury, В«IВ»Ancient Greek HistoriansВ«/IВ» (1909). F. M. Cornford,PAGE:936В«IВ»Thucydides mythistoricusВ«/IВ» (1907), sought to prove that the В«IВ»HistoryВ«/IВ» 
is really only an historical tragedy, В«IВ»i.e.В«/IВ» a dramatized version of the facts, but this view has not been adopted. 


