About this Edition

The Age of the Encyclopedia began in 1751, with the first volume of the first edition of {{Denis Diderot}}'s *Encyclopedie*, and ended in 1911, with the 11th edition of the Encyclopedia Britannica, shortly before the world went mad. ---An encyclopedic age.--- An encyclopedia is a compilation of the world's knowledge; an encyclopedic age requires the twin beliefs that such a compilation is possible, and that it is worthwhile. By 1911 it was no longer quite possible, in truth, but the dream lived on. The advertisements for the 11th declared that it was "Everything Explained That Is Explainable." In any case, the firm conviction of the worth of such a project allayed any fears about its possibility.

Underlying these two beliefs, though not following them in strict logic, is the idea of progress, indeed of continuous progress. Compilation implies rational understanding, the purpose of which is to make further understanding, if not inevitable, at least possible. With further understanding we may expect further improvement of the human condition. The encyclopedic outlook is fundamentally Whig. However else Diderot's philosophes and the editors of the 11th might have differed, on this they were agreed. As {{J.B. Bury}}, a contributor, pointed out in *The Idea of Progress*, the very concept of continuous historical progress did not exist before the 18th century. After 1911, it could no longer be believed in. 

Encyclopedias were written before Diderot, and are still written today, but the Age of the Encyclopedia is dead. The ongoing battles of Wikipedia would be alien to the encyclopedic age. Disagreements were of course as numerous and serious then as now, but not over what belongs in the encyclopedia—not over what can be known.

Though by the 11th Britannica was primarily a British operation, it betrays its Scottish origins in several amusing ways, like the immensely detailed entry on BAG-PIPE. It also had substantial contributions from many Americans, not least the financial one from Horace Everett Cooper, Britannica's publisher at the time. The prefatory note gives a thorough history of Britannica and I will not repeat it here.

---Celebrity.--- Its contributors include such luminaries as {{Matthew Arnold}}, {{T.H. Huxley}}, {{Peter Kropotkin}}, and {{Algernon Swinburne}}, future luminaries as James Frazer, Bertrand Russell, and Alfred North Whitehead, and a few past luminaries like {{Lord Macaulay}}, a contributor to earlier editions who survives in the 11th in his classic essays on BUNYAN, GOLDSMITH, JOHNSON, and PITT. There was scarcely a literary figure of note who did *not* contribute. The celebrities, however, are largely beside the point. Russell, who by virtue of his present fame is always cited, merely co-authored a single article, GEOMETRY. The anonymous article *on* Arnold is far better than the single article *by* him, a far too generous assessment of the tyrant of 19th-century French literature, the repugnant SAINTE-BEUVE.

---Arch-generalists.--- The real heroes of the 11th, its major contributors, are mostly unknown today. They were largely but by no means exclusively academics, in an age when the term stood in for genuine scholarship and erudition. This was the age of the polymath, and many display surprisingly varied expertise. BASE-BALL, as American a subject as one could wish, was written by a French professor, Ernest Babelon, also responsible for CARTHAGE, FOIL-FENCING, and KITE-FLYING. {{Austin Dobson}}, by profession a civil engineer who became a principal at the Board of Trade, by reputation a poet who specialized in exotic verse forms, is in the 11th the author of various articles on 18th-century literary figures such as FIELDING, RICHARDSON, CHESTERFIELD, and PRIOR.

The editors themselves pinch-hit on an astonishing range of subjects. Hugh Chisholm, the editor-in-chief, contributed 43 articles, including AGNOSTICISM, ROUSSEAU, NATIONAL DEBT, and JOAN OF ARC. His principal assistant, Walter Alison Phillips, a European history specialist, numbers AMBASSADOR, BALANCE OF POWER, CEREMONIAL USE OF LIGHTS, DRAGON, GOETHE, and JOHN WYCLIFFE among his 97 articles. Edmund Gosse, the 11th's literary editor, was still more prolific; his 125 articles cover nearly every conceivable department of literature, from ODE to GNOME AND GNOMIC POETRY, PROSE to PINDARICS to CRITICISM, and beyond, to BELGIUM, DENMARK, and NORWAY. 

---Arch-specialists.--- At the opposite end are the authors who contribute a single article on a subject that they know everything about. Joseph Burton co-wrote FIREBRICK with another brick expert, William Burton (doubtless a relation). As a partner in Pilkington’s Tile and Pottery Co., Clifton Junction, Manchester, Mr. Burton knew his firebrick, one can be sure. Or {{Lyman Abbott}}, an American divine who co-edited The Christian Union with HENRY WARD BEECHER and succeeded him as pastor Plymouth Church. One could scarcely ask for a better source. My favorite in this category is an "Investigator of Atmospheric Dust. Inventor of instruments for counting the dust particles in the atmosphere. Author of papers on Dust Fogs and Clouds; Hazing Effects of Atmospheric Dust; Cyclones and Anticyclones; &c., in publications of Royal Society," one John Aitken, who knew more about DUST than I imagined it possible to know.

Between them are those generalist-specialists who single-handedly shaped entire areas of the encyclopedia: the indefatigable archaeologist Thomas Ashby, the 11th's leading contributor at a staggering 237 articles and somehow possessed of an intimate knowledge of every Italian town that ever was; the bird man, {{Alfred Newton}}, whose 186 articles on bird species, written for the 9th edition, survive virtually unaltered into the 11th; and Kathleen Schlesinger, who wrote the article on every musical instrument you've ever heard of and quite a few you haven't.

---Where to begin.--- For literary merit the 11th is unparalleled. This was nearly the last generation drilled in Latin and Greek, and the prose reflects it on every page. To the virgin reader I commend a few of my shorter favorites: Gosse on BLANK VERSE, J.B. Bury and Richard Lydekker on EDWARD GIBBON, J.H. Freese and Eduard Meyer on XENOPHON, Anonymous on HENRY JAMES. The magisterial, collaborative, book-length treatises on EGYPT, JAPAN, FRANCE, and ROME, though intimidating, can now easily be browsed by section. Or begin with the Topic Index. The ancillary material includes a contemporary Reader's Guide to the 11th, aimed at Americans. It remains useful, if rather quaint. Best of all is simply to look up whatever strikes your fancy and start reading.

---Criticisms.--- The 11th was generally well-received on its publication, but it had its detractors, through whom it usually holds a steady course. The editor-in-chief, Hugh Chisholm, described its theological stance as "rational-Anglican"; naturally many Protestants found it too sympathetic to Catholicism, and vice versa. Many of the Cambridge dons, under whose auspices it was published, found it insufficiently academic, a criticism belied by a look at the contributors' index. Perhaps they meant merely that it was insufficiently donnish; and they were correct, by their standards. More recent critics often object that the 11th was written more than a century ago, and take its contributors to task for their inability to divine the future.

Then there is the race question. The two notorious articles are KU KLUX KLAN and NEGRO. The reader may consult them for himself. They each contain a few sentences that today one would not utter in polite company, but they reflect the educated consensus of the time. There is a lot of truth in Walter Fleming's conclusion about the Klan: "During the Reconstruction the people of the South were divided thus: nearly all native whites (the most prominent of whom were disfranchised) on one side irrespective of former political faith, and on the other side the ex-slaves organized and led by a few native and Northern whites called respectively scalawags and carpet-baggers, who were supported by the United States government and who controlled the Southern state governments. The Ku Klux movement in its wider aspects was the effort of the first class to destroy the control of the second class." Both articles retain historical interest at the least, while most current commentary on these subjects is of no interest at all.

Britannica's owner Horace Hooper, a born promoter, gave a series of gala balls to inaugurate the 11th. Attending one was a young woman whose place card read "Miss Stephen", on the coattails of her father, {{Sir Leslie}}, a contributor. Thirteen years later this young woman, Virginia Woolf, would write, "On or about December 1910, human character changed." So it did, even if it is the facetious precision of the date that has made the remark famous. The 11th stands as an enduring monument to what human character once was, and can never be again.

---Features of this version.--- This version aims at providing everything in the original and more. Every article links its original scan, along with full scans for each volume. The original volume and page numbers are displayed in the left margin for ease of citation. When an article is based on source that has not been proofread or contains potential OCR transcription errors, this is also marked. 

Search is available by article title, by contributor, within article text, and across the entire corpus. Special search operators, such as min, max, and exclusion, are also supported; clicking the information icon next to the Search button displays the complete list. The longer articles begin with section links, corresponding to the internal sections and shoulder-headers of the original, to facilitate internal navigation.

Chisholm says of Vol. 29, the index volume, that "all those who wish to make full use of the Eleventh Edition of the Encyclopædia Britannica should regard [it] as the real guide to its contents." The guide to this version is far better than he could have imagined. There is a full contributor index, listing each contributor and his articles, along with degrees, other credentials, and a link to his biographical entry, where applicable. In the original this was impossible to assemble without tedious labor. The Word Index has been supplanted and hugely enhanced by full-text search. The Topic Index has been faithfully reproduced, and each article notes the topic or topics in which it appears. Considerable care has been taken to render articles in a form both accurate and close to its original appearance.

It is characteristic of our age that it is mostly organizations, not people, that I have to thank. Wikipedia and the Internet Archive supplied the raw materials on which it is based. Thanks most of all to Anthropic and Claude Code Opus, which did nearly all the heavy lifting, and to OpenAI and GPT Codex, which drafted the specification. Alex Zakharov gave the whole site a close read and helped me work through numerous interface quirks. 

Errors are inevitable in this kind of undertaking. If you advise me of any you happen to find, they will be promptly addressed. 

AARON HASPEL.
ahaspel@gmail.com

:New York ::April 16, 2026.